# Primeira Parte (FP)
## Capítulo 357: Whether the lights of heaven are living beings?

Objection 1: It would seem that the lights of heaven are living beings.
For the nobler a body is, the more nobly it should be adorned. But a
body less noble than the heaven, is adorned with living beings, with
fish, birds, and the beasts of the field. Therefore the lights of
heaven, as pertaining to its adornment, should be living beings also.
Objection 2: Further, the nobler a body is, the nobler must be its
form. But the sun, moon, and stars are nobler bodies than plants or
animals, and must therefore have nobler forms. Now the noblest of all
forms is the soul, as being the first principle of life. Hence
Augustine (De Vera Relig. xxix) says: "Every living substance stands
higher in the order of nature than one that has not life." The lights
of heaven, therefore, are living beings.
Objection 3: Further, a cause is nobler than its effect. But the sun,
moon, and stars are a cause of life, as is especially evidenced in the
case of animals generated from putrefaction, which receive life from
the power of the sun and stars. Much more, therefore, have the heavenly
bodies a living soul.
Objection 4: Further, the movement of the heaven and the heavenly
bodies are natural (De Coel. i, text. 7,8): and natural movement is
from an intrinsic principle. Now the principle of movement in the
heavenly bodies is a substance capable of apprehension, and is moved as
the desirer is moved by the object desired (Metaph. xii, text. 36).
Therefore, seemingly, the apprehending principle is intrinsic to the
heavenly bodies: and consequently they are living beings.
Objection 5: Further, the first of movables is the heaven. Now, of all
things that are endowed with movement the first moves itself, as is
proved in Phys. viii, text. 34, because, what is such of itself
precedes that which is by another. But only beings that are living move
themselves, as is shown in the same book (text. 27). Therefore the
heavenly bodies are living beings.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. ii), "Let no one esteem
the heavens or the heavenly bodies to be living things, for they have
neither life nor sense."
I answer that, Philosophers have differed on this question. Anaxagoras,
for instance, as Augustine mentions (De Civ. Dei xviii, 41), "was
condemned by the Athenians for teaching that the sun was a fiery mass
of stone, and neither a god nor even a living being." On the other
hand, the Platonists held that the heavenly bodies have life. Nor was
there less diversity of opinion among the Doctors of the Church. It was
the belief of Origen (Peri Archon i) and Jerome that these bodies were
alive, and the latter seems to explain in that sense the words (Eccles.
1:6), "The spirit goeth forward, surveying all places round about." But
Basil (Hom. iii, vi in Hexaem.) and Damascene (De Fide Orth. ii)
maintain that the heavenly bodies are inanimate. Augustine leaves the
matter in doubt, without committing himself to either theory, though he
goes so far as to say that if the heavenly bodies are really living
beings, their souls must be akin to the angelic nature (Gen. ad lit.
ii, 18; Enchiridion lviii).
In examining the truth of this question, where such diversity of
opinion exists, we shall do well to bear in mind that the union of soul
and body exists for the sake of the soul and not of the body; for the
form does not exist for the matter, but the matter for the form. Now
the nature and power of the soul are apprehended through its operation,
which is to a certain extent its end. Yet for some of these operations,
as sensation and nutrition, our body is a necessary instrument. Hence
it is clear that the sensitive and nutritive souls must be united to a
body in order to exercise their functions. There are, however,
operations of the soul, which are not exercised through the medium of
the body, though the body ministers, as it were, to their production.
The intellect, for example, makes use of the phantasms derived from the
bodily senses, and thus far is dependent on the body, although capable
of existing apart from it. It is not, however, possible that the
functions of nutrition, growth, and generation, through which the
nutritive soul operates, can be exercised by the heavenly bodies, for
such operations are incompatible with a body naturally incorruptible.
Equally impossible is it that the functions of the sensitive soul can
appertain to the heavenly body, since all the senses depend on the
sense of touch, which perceives elemental qualities, and all the organs
of the senses require a certain proportion in the admixture of
elements, whereas the nature of the heavenly bodies is not elemental.
It follows, then, that of the operations of the soul the only ones left
to be attributed to the heavenly bodies are those of understanding and
moving; for appetite follows both sensitive and intellectual
perception, and is in proportion thereto. But the operations of the
intellect, which does not act through the body, do not need a body as
their instrument, except to supply phantasms through the senses.
Moreover, the operations of the sensitive soul, as we have seen, cannot
be attributed to the heavenly bodies. Accordingly, the union of a soul
to a heavenly body cannot be for the purpose of the operations of the
intellect. It remains, then, only to consider whether the movement of
the heavenly bodies demands a soul as the motive power, not that the
soul, in order to move the heavenly body, need be united to the latter
as its form; but by contact of power, as a mover is united to that
which he moves. Wherefore Aristotle (Phys. viii, text. 42,43), after
showing that the first mover is made up of two parts, the moving and
the moved, goes on to show the nature of the union between these two
parts. This, he says, is effected by contact which is mutual if both
are bodies; on the part of one only, if one is a body and the other
not. The Platonists explain the union of soul and body in the same way,
as a contact of a moving power with the object moved, and since Plato
holds the heavenly bodies to be living beings, this means nothing else
but that substances of spiritual nature are united to them, and act as
their moving power. A proof that the heavenly bodies are moved by the
direct influence and contact of some spiritual substance, and not, like
bodies of specific gravity, by nature, lies in the fact that whereas
nature moves to one fixed end which having attained, it rests; this
does not appear in the movement of heavenly bodies. Hence it follows
that they are moved by some intellectual substances. Augustine appears
to be of the same opinion when he expresses his belief that all
corporeal things are ruled by God through the spirit of life (De Trin.
iii, 4).
From what has been said, then, it is clear that the heavenly bodies are
not living beings in the same sense as plants and animals, and that if
they are called so, it can only be equivocally. It will also be seen
that the difference of opinion between those who affirm, and those who
deny, that these bodies have life, is not a difference of things but of
words.
Reply to Objection 1: Certain things belong to the adornment of the
universe by reason of their proper movement; and in this way the
heavenly luminaries agree with others that conduce to that adornment,
for they are moved by a living substance.
Reply to Objection 2: One being may be nobler than another absolutely,
but not in a particular respect. While, then, it is not conceded that
the souls of heavenly bodies are nobler than the souls of animals
absolutely it must be conceded that they are superior to them with
regard to their respective forms, since their form perfects their
matter entirely, which is not in potentiality to other forms; whereas a
soul does not do this. Also as regards movement the power that moves
the heavenly bodies is of a nobler kind.
Reply to Objection 3: Since the heavenly body is a mover moved, it is
of the nature of an instrument, which acts in virtue of the agent: and
therefore since this agent is a living substance the heavenly body can
impart life in virtue of that agent.
Reply to Objection 4: The movements of the heavenly bodies are natural,
not on account of their active principle, but on account of their
passive principle; that is to say, from a certain natural aptitude for
being moved by an intelligent power.
Reply to Objection 5: The heaven is said to move itself in as far as it
is compounded of mover and moved; not by the union of the mover, as the
form, with the moved, as the matter, but by contact with the motive
power, as we have said. So far, then, the principle that moves it may
be called intrinsic, and consequently its movement natural with respect
to that active principle; just as we say that voluntary movement is
natural to the animal as animal (Phys. viii, text. 27).
ON THE WORK OF THE FIFTH DAY (ONE ARTICLE)
We must next consider the work of the fifth day.
Objection 1: It would seem that this work is not fittingly described.
For the waters produce that which the power of water suffices to
produce. But the power of water does not suffice for the production of
every kind of fishes and birds since we find that many of them are
generated from seed. Therefore the words, "Let the waters bring forth
the creeping creature having life, and the fowl that may fly over the
earth," do not fittingly describe this work.
Objection 2: Further, fishes and birds are not produced from water
only, but earth seems to predominate over water in their composition,
as is shown by the fact that their bodies tend naturally to the earth
and rest upon it. It is not, then, fittingly that fishes and birds are
produced from water.
Objection 3: Further, fishes move in the waters, and birds in the air.
If, then, fishes are produced from the waters, birds ought to be
produced from the air, and not from the waters.
Objection 4: Further, not all fishes creep through the waters, for
some, as seals, have feet and walk on land. Therefore the production of
fishes is not sufficiently described by the words, "Let the waters
bring forth the creeping creature having life."
Objection 5: Further, land animals are more perfect than birds and
fishes which appears from the fact that they have more distinct limbs,
and generation of a higher order. For they bring forth living beings,
whereas birds and fishes bring forth eggs. But the more perfect has
precedence in the order of nature. Therefore fishes and birds ought not
to have been produced on the fifth day, before land animals.
On the contrary, Suffices the authority of Scripture.
I answer that, As said above, ([589]Q[70], A[1]), the order of the work
of adornment corresponds to the order of the work of distinction.
Hence, as among the three days assigned to the work of distinction, the
middle, or second, day is devoted to the work of distinction of water,
which is the intermediate body, so in the three days of the work of
adornment, the middle day, which is the fifth, is assigned to the
adornment of the intermediate body, by the production of birds and
fishes. As, then, Moses makes mention of the lights and the light on
the fourth day, to show that the fourth day corresponds to the first
day on which he had said that the light was made, so on this fifth day
he mentions the waters and the firmament of heaven to show that the
fifth day corresponds to the second. It must, however, be observed that
Augustine differs from other writers in his opinion about the
production of fishes and birds, as he differs about the production of
plants. For while others say that fishes and birds were produced on the
fifth day actually, he holds that the nature of the waters produced
them on that day potentially.
Reply to Objection 1: It was laid down by Avicenna that animals of all
kinds can be generated by various minglings of the elements, and
naturally, without any kind of seed. This, however, seems repugnant to
the fact that nature produces its effects by determinate means, and
consequently, those things that are naturally generated from seed
cannot be generated naturally in any other way. It ought, then, rather
to be said that in the natural generation of all animals that are
generated from seed, the active principle lies in the formative power
of the seed, but that in the case of animals generated from
putrefaction, the formative power of is the influence of the heavenly
bodies. The material principle, however, in the generation of either
kind of animals, is either some element, or something compounded of the
elements. But at the first beginning of the world the active principle
was the Word of God, which produced animals from material elements,
either in act, as some holy writers say, or virtually, as Augustine
teaches. Not as though the power possessed by water or earth of
producing all animals resides in the earth and the water themselves, as
Avicenna held, but in the power originally given to the elements of
producing them from elemental matter by the power of seed or the
influence of the stars.
Reply to Objection 2: The bodies of birds and fishes may be considered
from two points of view. If considered in themselves, it will be
evident that the earthly element must predominate, since the element
that is least active, namely, the earth, must be the most abundant in
quantity in order that the mingling may be duly tempered in the body of
the animal. But if considered as by nature constituted to move with
certain specific motions, thus they have some special affinity with the
bodies in which they move; and hence the words in which their
generation is described.
Reply to Objection 3: The air, as not being so apparent to the senses,
is not enumerated by itself, but with other things: partly with the
water, because the lower region of the air is thickened by watery
exhalations; partly with the heaven as to the higher region. But birds
move in the lower part of the air, and so are said to fly "beneath the
firmament," even if the firmament be taken to mean the region of
clouds. Hence the production of birds is ascribed to the water.
Reply to Objection 4: Nature passes from one extreme to another through
the medium; and therefore there are creatures of intermediate type
between the animals of the air and those of the water, having something
in common with both; and they are reckoned as belonging to that class
to which they are most allied, through the characters possessed in
common with that class, rather than with the other. But in order to
include among fishes all such intermediate forms as have special
characters like to theirs, the words, "Let the waters bring forth the
creeping creature having life," are followed by these: "God created
great whales," etc.
Reply to Objection 5: The order in which the production of these
animals is given has reference to the order of those bodies which they
are set to adorn, rather than to the superiority of the animals
themselves. Moreover, in generation also the more perfect is reached
through the less perfect.
ON THE WORK OF THE SIXTH DAY (ONE ARTICLE)
We must now consider the work of the sixth day.
Objection 1: It would seem that this work is not fittingly described.
For as birds and fishes have a living soul, so also have land animals.
But these animals are not themselves living souls. Therefore the words,
"Let the earth bring forth the living creature," should rather have
been, "Let the earth bring forth the living four-footed creatures."
Objection 2: Further, a genus ought not to be opposed to its species.
But beasts and cattle are quadrupeds. Therefore quadrupeds ought not to
be enumerated as a class with beasts and cattle.
Objection 3: Further, as animals belong to a determinate genus and
species, so also does man. But in the making of man nothing is said of
his genus and species, and therefore nothing ought to have been said
about them in the production of other animals, whereas it is said
"according to its genus" and "in its species."
Objection 4: Further, land animals are more like man, whom God is
recorded to have blessed, than are birds and fishes. But as birds and
fishes are said to be blessed, this should have been said, with much
more reason, of the other animals as well.
Objection 5: Further, certain animals are generated from putrefaction,
which is a kind of corruption. But corruption is repugnant to the first
founding of the world. Therefore such animals should not have been
produced at that time.
Objection 6: Further, certain animals are poisonous, and injurious to
man. But there ought to have been nothing injurious to man before man
sinned. Therefore such animals ought not to have been made by God at
all, since He is the Author of good; or at least not until man had
sinned.
On the contrary, Suffices the authority of Scripture.
I answer that, As on the fifth day the intermediate body, namely, the
water, is adorned, and thus that day corresponds to the second day; so
the sixth day, on which the lowest body, or the earth, is adorned by
the production of land animals, corresponds to the third day. Hence the
earth is mentioned in both places. And here again Augustine says (Gen.
ad lit. v) that the production was potential, and other holy writers
that it was actual.
Reply to Objection 1: The different grades of life which are found in
different living creatures can be discovered from the various ways in
which Scripture speaks of them, as Basil says (Hom. viii in Hexaem.).
The life of plants, for instance, is very imperfect and difficult to
discern, and hence, in speaking of their production, nothing is said of
their life, but only their generation is mentioned, since only in
generation is a vital act observed in them. For the powers of nutrition
and growth are subordinate to the generative life, as will be shown
later on ([590]Q[78], A[2]). But amongst animals, those that live on
land are, generally speaking, more perfect than birds and fishes, not
because the fish is devoid of memory, as Basil upholds (Hom. viii in
Hexaem.) and Augustine rejects (Gen. ad lit. iii), but because their
limbs are more distinct and their generation of a higher order, (yet
some imperfect animals, such as bees and ants, are more intelligent in
certain ways). Scripture, therefore, does not call fishes "living
creatures," but "creeping creatures having life"; whereas it does call
land animals "living creatures" on account of their more perfect life,
and seems to imply that fishes are merely bodies having in them
something of a soul, whilst land animals, from the higher perfection of
their life, are, as it were, living souls with bodies subject to them.
But the life of man, as being the most perfect grade, is not said to be
produced, like the life of other animals, by earth or water, but
immediately by God.
Reply to Objection 2: By "cattle," domestic animals are signified,
which in any way are of service to man: but by "beasts," wild animals
such as bears and lions are designated. By "creeping things" those
animals are meant which either have no feet and cannot rise from the
earth, as serpents, or those whose feet are too short to life them far
from the ground, as the lizard and tortoise. But since certain animals,
as deer and goats, seem to fall under none of these classes, the word
"quadrupeds" is added. Or perhaps the word "quadruped" is used first as
being the genus, to which the others are added as species, for even
some reptiles, such as lizards and tortoises, are four-footed.
Reply to Objection 3: In other animals, and in plants, mention is made
of genus and species, to denote the generation of like from like. But
it was unnecessary to do so in the case of man, as what had already
been said of other creatures might be understood of him. Again, animals
and plants may be said to be produced according to their kinds, to
signify their remoteness from the Divine image and likeness, whereas
man is said to be made "to the image and likeness of God."
Reply to Objection 4: The blessing of God gives power to multiply by
generation, and, having been mentioned in the preceding account of the
making of birds and fishes, could be understood of the beasts of the
earth, without requiring to be repeated. The blessing, however, is
repeated in the case of man, since in him generation of children has a
special relation to the number of the elect [*Cf. Augustine, Gen. ad
lit. iii, 12], and to prevent anyone from saying that there was any sin
whatever in the act of begetting children. As to plants, since they
experience neither desire of propagation, nor sensation in generating,
they are deemed unworthy of a formal blessing.
Reply to Objection 5: Since the generation of one thing is the
corruption of another, it was not incompatible with the first formation
of things, that from the corruption of the less perfect the more
perfect should be generated. Hence animals generated from the
corruption of inanimate things, or of plants, may have been generated
then. But those generated from corruption of animals could not have
been produced then otherwise than potentially.
Reply to Objection 6: In the words of Augustine (Super. Gen. contr.
Manich. i): "If an unskilled person enters the workshop of an artificer
he sees in it many appliances of which he does not understand the use,
and which, if he is a foolish fellow, he considers unnecessary.
Moreover, should he carelessly fall into the fire, or wound himself
with a sharp-edged tool, he is under the impression that many of the
things there are hurtful; whereas the craftsman, knowing their use,
laughs at his folly. And thus some people presume to find fault with
many things in this world, through not seeing the reasons for their
existence. For though not required for the furnishing of our house,
these things are necessary for the perfection of the universe." And,
since man before he sinned would have used the things of this world
conformably to the order designed, poisonous animals would not have
injured him.
ON THE THINGS THAT BELONG TO THE SEVENTH DAY (THREE ARTICLES)
We must next consider the things that belong to the seventh day. Under
this head there are three points of inquiry:
(1) About the completion of the works;
(2) About the resting of God;
(3) About the blessing and sanctifying of this day.