# Primeira Parte (FP)
## Capítulo 456: whether his children come to honor or dishonor."

I answer that, By natural knowledge, of which we are treating now, the
souls of the dead do not know what passes on earth. This follows from
what has been laid down [746](A[4]), since the separated soul has
knowledge of singulars, by being in a way determined to them, either by
some vestige of previous knowledge or affection, or by the Divine
order. Now the souls departed are in a state of separation from the
living, both by Divine order and by their mode of existence, whilst
they are joined to the world of incorporeal spiritual substances; and
hence they are ignorant of what goes on among us. Whereof Gregory gives
the reason thus: "The dead do not know how the living act, for the life
of the spirit is far from the life of the flesh; and so, as corporeal
things differ from incorporeal in genus, so they are distinct in
knowledge" (Moral. xii). Augustine seems to say the same (De Cura pro
Mort. xiii), when he asserts that, "the souls of the dead have no
concern in the affairs of the living."
Gregory and Augustine, however, seem to be divided in opinion as
regards the souls of the blessed in heaven, for Gregory continues the
passage above quoted: "The case of the holy souls is different, for
since they see the light of Almighty God, we cannot believe that
external things are unknown to them." But Augustine (De Cura pro Mort.
xiii) expressly says: "The dead, even the saints do not know what is
done by the living or by their own children," as a gloss quotes on the
text, "Abraham hath not known us" (Is. 63:16). He confirms this opinion
by saying that he was not visited, nor consoled in sorrow by his
mother, as when she was alive; and he could not think it possible that
she was less kind when in a happier state; and again by the fact that
the Lord promised to king Josias that he should die, lest he should see
his people's afflictions (4 Kings 22:20). Yet Augustine says this in
doubt; and premises, "Let every one take, as he pleases, what I say."
Gregory, on the other hand, is positive, since he says, "We cannot
believe." His opinion, indeed, seems to be the more probable one---that
the souls of the blessed who see God do know all that passes here. For
they are equal to the angels, of whom Augustine says that they know
what happens among those living on earth. But as the souls of the
blessed are most perfectly united to Divine justice, they do not suffer
from sorrow, nor do they interfere in mundane affairs, except in
accordance with Divine justice.
Reply to Objection 1: The souls of the departed may care for the
living, even if ignorant of their state; just as we care for the dead
by pouring forth prayer on their behalf, though we are ignorant of
their state. Moreover, the affairs of the living can be made known to
them not immediately, but the souls who pass hence thither, or by
angels and demons, or even by "the revelation of the Holy Ghost," as
Augustine says in the same book.
Reply to Objection 2: That the dead appear to the living in any way
whatever is either by the special dispensation of God; in order that
the souls of the dead may interfere in affairs of the living---and this
is to be accounted as miraculous. Or else such apparitions occur
through the instrumentality of bad or good angels, without the
knowledge of the departed; as may likewise happen when the living
appear, without their own knowledge, to others living, as Augustine
says in the same book. And so it may be said of Samuel that he appeared
through Divine revelation; according to Ecclus. 46:23, "he slept, and
told the king the end of his life." Or, again, this apparition was
procured by the demons; unless, indeed, the authority of Ecclesiasticus
be set aside through not being received by the Jews as canonical
Scripture.
Reply to Objection 3: This kind of ignorance does not proceed from the
obstacle of local distance, but from the cause mentioned above.
OF THE FIRST PRODUCTION OF MAN'S SOUL (FOUR ARTICLES)
After the foregoing we must consider the first production of man,
concerning which there are four subjects of treatment: (1) the
production of man himself; (2) the end of this production; (3) the
state and condition of the first man; (4) the place of his abode.
Concerning the production of man, there are three things to be
considered: (1) the production of man's soul; (2) the production of
man's body; (3) the production of the woman.
Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:
(1) Whether man's soul was something made, or was of the Divine
substance?
(2) Whether, if made, it was created?
(3) Whether it was made by angelic instrumentality?
(4) Whether it was made before the body?