# Primeira Parte (FP)
## Capítulo 579: Whether there be such a thing as fate?

Objection 1: It would seem that fate is nothing. For Gregory says in a
homily for the Epiphany (Hom. x in Evang.): "Far be it from the hearts
of the faithful to think that fate is anything real."
Objection 2: Further, what happens by fate is not unforeseen, for as
Augustine says (De Civ. Dei v, 4), "fate is understood to be derived
from the verb 'fari' which means to speak"; as though things were said
to happen by fate, which are "fore-spoken" by one who decrees them to
happen. Now what is foreseen is neither lucky nor chance-like. If
therefore things happen by fate, there will be neither luck nor chance
in the world.
On the contrary, What does not exist cannot be defined. But Boethius
(De Consol. iv) defines fate thus: "Fate is a disposition inherent to
changeable things, by which Providence connects each one with its
proper order."
I answer that, In this world some things seem to happen by luck or
chance. Now it happens sometimes that something is lucky or chance-like
as compared to inferior causes, which, if compared to some higher
cause, is directly intended. For instance, if two servants are sent by
their master to the same place; the meeting of the two servants in
regard to themselves is by chance; but as compared to the master, who
had ordered it, it is directly intended.
So there were some who refused to refer to a higher cause such events
which by luck or chance take place here below. These denied the
existence of fate and Providence, as Augustine relates of Tully (De
Civ. Dei v, 9). And this is contrary to what we have said above about
Providence ([942]Q[22], A[2]).
On the other hand, some have considered that everything that takes
place here below by luck or by chance, whether in natural things or in
human affairs, is to be reduced to a superior cause, namely, the
heavenly bodies. According to these fate is nothing else than "a
disposition of the stars under which each one is begotten or born"
[*Cf. St. Augustine De Civ. Dei v, 1,8,9]. But this will not hold.
First, as to human affairs: because we have proved above ([943]Q[115],
A[4]) that human actions are not subject to the action of heavenly
bodies, save accidentally and indirectly. Now the cause of fate, since
it has the ordering of things that happen by fate, must of necessity be
directly and of itself the cause of what takes place. Secondly, as to
all things that happen accidentally: for it has been said ([944]Q[115],
A[6]) that what is accidental, is properly speaking neither a being,
nor a unity. But every action of nature terminates in some one thing.
Wherefore it is impossible for that which is accidental to be the
proper effect of an active natural principle. No natural cause can
therefore have for its proper effect that a man intending to dig a
grace finds a treasure. Now it is manifest that a heavenly body acts
after the manner of a natural principle: wherefore its effects in this
world are natural. It is therefore impossible that any active power of
a heavenly body be the cause of what happens by accident here below,