# Primeira Parte (FP)
## Capítulo 144: Whether the foreknowledge of merits is the cause of predestination?

Objection 1: It seems that foreknowledge of merits is the cause of
predestination. For the Apostle says (Rom. 8:29): "Whom He foreknew, He
also predestined." Again a gloss of Ambrose on Rom. 9:15: "I will have
mercy upon whom I will have mercy" says: "I will give mercy to him who,
I foresee, will turn to Me with his whole heart." Therefore it seems
the foreknowledge of merits is the cause of predestination.
Objection 2: Further, Divine predestination includes the divine will,
which by no means can be irrational; since predestination is "the
purpose to have mercy," as Augustine says (De Praed. Sanct. ii, 17).
But there can be no other reason for predestination than the
foreknowledge of merits. Therefore it must be the cause of reason of
predestination.
Objection 3: Further, "There is no injustice in God" (Rom. 9:14). Now
it would seem unjust that unequal things be given to equals. But all
men are equal as regards both nature and original sin; and inequality
in them arises from the merits or demerits of their actions. Therefore
God does not prepare unequal things for men by predestinating and
reprobating, unless through the foreknowledge of their merits and
demerits.
On the contrary, The Apostle says (Titus 3:5): "Not by works of justice
which we have done, but according to His mercy He saved us." But as He
saved us, so He predestined that we should be saved. Therefore,
foreknowledge of merits is not the cause or reason of predestination.
I answer that, Since predestination includes will, as was said above
[182](A[4]), the reason of predestination must be sought for in the
same way as was the reason of the will of God. Now it was shown above
([183]Q[19], A[5] ), that we cannot assign any cause of the divine will
on the part of the act of willing; but a reason can be found on the
part of the things willed; inasmuch as God wills one thing on account
of something else. Wherefore nobody has been so insane as to say that
merit is the cause of divine predestination as regards the act of the
predestinator. But this is the question, whether, as regards the
effect, predestination has any cause; or what comes to the same thing,