# Primeira Parte (FP)
## Capítulo 322: Whether the evil of fault can be in the angels?

Objection 1: It would seem that there can be no evil of fault in the
angels. For there can be no evil except in things which are in
potentiality, as is said by the Philosopher (Metaph. ix, text. 19),
because the subject of privation is a being in potentiality. But the
angels have not being in potentiality, since they are subsisting forms.
Therefore there can be no evil in them.
Objection 2: Further, the angels are higher than the heavenly bodies.
But philosophers say that there cannot be evil in the heavenly bodies.
Therefore neither can there by in the angels.
Objection 3: Further, what is natural to a thing is always in it. But
it is natural for the angels to be moved by the movement of love
towards God. Therefore such love cannot be withdrawn from them. But in
loving God they do not sin. Consequently the angels cannot sin.
Objection 4: Further, desire is only of what is good or apparently
good. Now for the angels there can be no apparent good which is not a
true good; because in them either there can be no error at all, or at
least not before guilt. Therefore the angels can desire only what it
truly good. But no one sins by desiring what is truly good.
Consequently the angel does not sin by desire.
On the contrary, It is said (Job 4:18): "In His angels He found
wickedness."
I answer that, An angel or any other rational creature considered in
his own nature, can sin; and to whatever creature it belongs not to
sin, such creature has it as a gift of grace, and not from the
condition of nature. The reason of this is, because sinning is nothing
else than a deviation from that rectitude which an act ought to have;