# Primeira Parte da Segunda Parte (FS)
## Capítulo 558: Whether there was any reasonable cause for the ceremonial observances?

Objection 1: It would seem that there was no reasonable cause for the
ceremonial observances. Because, as the Apostle says (1 Tim. 4:4),
"every creature of God is good, and nothing to be rejected that is
received with thanksgiving." It was therefore unfitting that they
should be forbidden to eat certain foods, as being unclean according to
Lev. 11 [*Cf. Dt. 14].
Objection 2: Further, just as animals are given to man for food, so
also are herbs: wherefore it is written (Gn. 9:3): "As the green herbs
have I delivered all" flesh "to you." But the Law did not distinguish
any herbs from the rest as being unclean, although some are most
harmful, for instance, those that are poisonous. Therefore it seems
that neither should any animals have been prohibited as being unclean.
Objection 3: Further, if the matter from which a thing is generated be
unclean, it seems that likewise the thing generated therefrom is
unclean. But flesh is generated from blood. Since therefore all flesh
was not prohibited as unclean, it seems that in like manner neither
should blood have been forbidden as unclean; nor the fat which is
engendered from blood.
Objection 4: Further, Our Lord said (Mat. 10:28; cf. Lk. 12:4), that
those should not be feared "that kill the body," since after death they
"have no more that they can do": which would not be true if after death
harm might come to man through anything done with his body. Much less
therefore does it matter to an animal already dead how its flesh be
cooked. Consequently there seems to be no reason in what is said, Ex.
23:19: "Thou shalt not boil a kid in the milk of its dam."
Objection 5: Further, all that is first brought forth of man and beast,
as being most perfect, is commanded to be offered to the Lord (Ex. 13).
Therefore it is an unfitting command that is set forth in Lev. 19:23:
"when you shall be come into the land, and shall have planted in it
fruit trees, you shall take away the uncircumcision [*'Praeputia,'
which Douay version renders 'first fruits'] of them," i.e. the first
crops, and they "shall be unclean to you, neither shall you eat of
them."
Objection 6: Further, clothing is something extraneous to man's body.
Therefore certain kinds of garments should not have been forbidden to
the Jews: for instance (Lev. 19:19): "Thou shalt not wear a garment
that is woven of two sorts": and (Dt. 22:5): "A woman shall not be
clothed with man's apparel, neither shall a man use woman's apparel":
and further on (Dt. 22:11): "Thou shalt not wear a garment that is
woven of woolen and linen together."
Objection 7: Further, to be mindful of God's commandments concerns not
the body but the heart. Therefore it is unsuitably prescribed (Dt. 6:8,
seqq.) that they should "bind" the commandments of God "as a sign" on
their hands; and that they should "write them in the entry"; and (Num.
15:38, seqq.) that they should "make to themselves fringes in the
corners of their garments, putting in them ribands of blue . . . they
may remember . . . the commandments of the Lord."
Objection 8: Further, the Apostle says (1 Cor. 9:9) that God does not
"take care for oxen," and, therefore, neither of other irrational
animals. Therefore without reason is it commanded (Dt. 22:6): "If thou
find, as thou walkest by the way, a bird's nest in a tree . . . thou
shalt not take the dam with her young"; and (Dt. 25:4): "Thou shalt not
muzzle the ox that treadeth out thy corn"; and (Lev. 19:19): "Thou
shalt not make thy cattle to gender with beasts of any other kind."
Objection 9: Further, no distinction was made between clean and unclean
plants. Much less therefore should any distinction have been made about
the cultivation of plants. Therefore it was unfittingly prescribed
(Lev. 19:19): "Thou shalt not sow thy field with different seeds"; and
(Dt. 22:9, seqq.): "Thou shalt sow thy vineyard with divers seeds";
and: "Thou shalt not plough with an ox and an ass together."
Objection 10: Further, it is apparent that inanimate things are most of
all subject to the power of man. Therefore it was unfitting to debar
man from taking silver and gold of which idols were made, or anything
they found in the houses of idols, as expressed in the commandment of
the Law (Dt. 7:25, seqq.). It also seems an absurd commandment set
forth in Dt. 23:13, that they should "dig round about and . . . cover
with earth that which they were eased of."
Objection 11: Further, piety is required especially in priests. But it
seems to be an act of piety to assist at the burial of one's friends:
wherefore Tobias is commended for so doing (Tob. 1:20, seqq.). In like
manner it is sometimes an act of piety to marry a loose woman, because
she is thereby delivered from sin and infamy. Therefore it seems
inconsistent for these things to be forbidden to priests (Lev. 21).
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 18:14): "But thou art otherwise
instructed by the Lord thy God": from which words we may gather that
these observances were instituted by God to be a special prerogative of
that people. Therefore they are not without reason or cause.
I answer that, The Jewish people, as stated above [2119](A[5]), were
specially chosen for the worship of God, and among them the priests
themselves were specially set apart for that purpose. And just as other
things that are applied to the divine worship, need to be marked in
some particular way so that they be worthy of the worship of God; so
too in that people's, and especially the priests', mode of life, there
needed to be certain special things befitting the divine worship,