# Primeira Parte da Segunda Parte (FS)
## Capítulo 502: whether it be contingent or necessary, is subject to the eternal law:

while things pertaining to the Divine Nature or Essence are not subject
to the eternal law, but are the eternal law itself.
Reply to Objection 1: We may speak of God's will in two ways. First, as
to the will itself: and thus, since God's will is His very Essence, it
is subject neither to the Divine government, nor to the eternal law,
but is the same thing as the eternal law. Secondly, we may speak of
God's will, as to the things themselves that God wills about creatures;
which things are subject to the eternal law, in so far as they are
planned by Divine Wisdom. In reference to these things God's will is
said to be reasonable [rationalis]: though regarded in itself it should
rather be called their type [ratio].
Reply to Objection 2: God the Son was not made by God, but was
naturally born of God. Consequently He is not subject to Divine
providence or to the eternal law: but rather is Himself the eternal law
by a kind of appropriation, as Augustine explains (De Vera Relig.
xxxi). But He is said to be subject to the Father by reason of His
human nature, in respect of which also the Father is said to be greater
than He.
The third objection we grant, because it deals with those necessary
things that are created.
Reply to Objection 4: As the Philosopher says (Metaph. v, text. 6),
some necessary things have a cause of their necessity: and thus they
derive from something else the fact that they cannot be otherwise. And
this is in itself a most effective restraint; for whatever is
restrained, is said to be restrained in so far as it cannot do
otherwise than it is allowed to.