# Primeira Parte da Segunda Parte (FS)
## Capítulo 251: Whether the brave are more eager at first than in the midst of danger?

Objection 1: It would seem that the daring are not more eager at first
than in the midst of danger. Because trembling is caused by fear, which
is contrary to daring, as stated above [1411](A[1]; Q[44], A[3]). But
the daring sometimes tremble at first, as the Philosopher says (De
Problem. xxvii, 3). Therefore they are not more eager at first than in
the midst of danger.
Objection 2: Further, passion is intensified by an increase in its
object: thus since a good is lovable, what is better is yet more
lovable. But the object of daring is something difficult. Therefore the
greater the difficulty, the greater the daring. But danger is more
arduous and difficult when present. It is then therefore that daring is
greatest.
Objection 3: Further, anger is provoked by the infliction of wounds.
But anger causes daring; for the Philosopher says (Rhet. ii, 5) that
"anger makes man bold." Therefore when man is in the midst of danger
and when he is being beaten, then is he most daring.
On the contrary, It is said in Ethic. iii, 7 that "the daring are
precipitate and full of eagerness before the danger, yet in the midst
of dangers they stand aloof."
I answer that, Daring, being a movement of the sensitive appetite,
follows an apprehension of the sensitive faculty. But the sensitive
faculty cannot make comparisons, nor can it inquire into circumstances;
its judgment is instantaneous. Now it happens sometimes that it is
impossible for a man to take note in an instant of all the difficulties
of a certain situation: hence there arises the movement of daring to
face the danger; so that when he comes to experience the danger, he
feels the difficulty to be greater than he expected, and so gives way.
On the other hand, reason discusses all the difficulties of a
situation. Consequently men of fortitude who face danger according to
the judgment of reason, at first seem slack, because they face the
danger not from passion but with due deliberation. Yet when they are in
the midst of danger, they experience nothing unforeseen, but sometimes
the difficulty turns out to be less than they anticipated; wherefore
they are more persevering. Moreover, it may be because they face the
danger on account of the good of virtue which is the abiding object of
their will, however great the danger may prove: whereas men of daring
face the danger on account of a mere thought giving rise to hope and
banishing fear, as stated above [1412](A[3]).
Reply to Objection 1: Trembling does occur in men of daring, on account
of the heat being withdrawn from the outer to the inner parts of the
body, as occurs also in those who are afraid. But in men of daring the
heat withdraws to the heart; whereas in those who are afraid, it
withdraws to the inferior parts.
Reply to Objection 2: The object of love is good simply, wherefore if
it be increased, love is increased simply. But the object of daring is
a compound of good and evil; and the movement of daring towards evil
presupposes the movement of hope towards good. If, therefore, so much
difficulty be added to the danger that it overcomes hope, the movement
of daring does not ensue, but fails. But if the movement of daring does
ensue, the greater the danger, the greater is the daring considered to
be.
Reply to Objection 3: Hurt does not give rise to anger unless there be
some kind of hope, as we shall see later on ([1413]Q[46], A[1]).
Consequently if the danger be so great as to banish all hope of
victory, anger does not ensue. It is true, however, that if anger does
ensue, there will be greater daring.
OF ANGER, IN ITSELF (EIGHT ARTICLES)
We must now consider anger: and (1) anger in itself; (2) the cause of
anger and its remedy; (3) the effect of anger.
Under the first head there are eight points of inquiry:
(1) Whether anger is a special passion?
(2) Whether the object of anger is good or evil?
(3) Whether anger is in the concupiscible faculty?
(4) Whether anger is accompanied by an act of reason?
(5) Whether anger is more natural than desire?
(6) Whether anger is more grievous than hatred?
(7) Whether anger is only towards those with whom we have a relation of
justice?
(8) Of the species of anger.