# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 710: Whether temperance is only about desires and pleasures of touch?

Objection 1: It would seem that temperance is not only about desires
and pleasures of touch. For Augustine says (De Morib. Eccl. xix) that
"the function of temperance is to control and quell the desires which
draw us to the things which withdraw us from the laws of God and from
the fruit of His goodness"; and a little further on he adds that "it is
the duty of temperance to spurn all bodily allurements and popular
praise." Now we are withdrawn from God's laws not only by the desire
for pleasures of touch, but also by the desire for pleasures of the
other senses, for these, too, belong to the bodily allurements, and
again by the desire for riches or for worldly glory: wherefore it is
written (1 Tim. 6:10). "Desire [*'Cupiditas,' which is the Douay
version following the Greek {philargyria} renders 'desire of money'] is
the root of all evils." Therefore temperance is not only about desires
of pleasures of touch.
Objection 2: Further, the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 3) that "one who
is worthy of small things and deems himself worthy of them is
temperate, but he is not magnificent." Now honors, whether small or
great, of which he is speaking there, are an object of pleasure, not of
touch, but in the soul's apprehension. Therefore temperance is not only
about desires for pleasures of touch.
Objection 3: Further, things that are of the same genus would seem to
pertain to the matter of a particular virtue under one same aspect. Now
all pleasures of sense are apparently of the same genus. Therefore they
all equally belong to the matter of temperance.
Objection 4: Further, spiritual pleasures are greater than the
pleasures of the body, as stated above ([3440]FS, Q[31], A[5]) in the