# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 685: Whether magnificence is a special virtue?

Objection 1: It seems that magnificence is not a special virtue. For
magnificence would seem to consist in doing something great. But it may
belong to any virtue to do something great, if the virtue be great: as
in the case of one who has a great virtue of temperance, for he does a
great work of temperance. Therefore, magnificence is not a special
virtue, but denotes a perfect degree of any virtue.
Objection 2: Further, seemingly that which tends to a thing is the same
as that which does it. But it belongs to magnanimity to tend to
something great, as stated above ([3387]Q[129], AA[1],2). Therefore it
belongs to magnanimity likewise to do something great. Therefore
magnificence is not a special virtue distinct from magnanimity.
Objection 3: Further, magnificence seems to belong to holiness, for it
is written (Ex. 15:11): "Magnificent [Douay: 'glorious'] in holiness,"
and (Ps. 95:6): "Holiness and magnificence [Douay: 'Majesty'] in His
sanctuary." Now holiness is the same as religion, as stated above
([3388]Q[81], A[8]). Therefore magnificence is apparently the same as
religion. Therefore it is not a special virtue, distinct from the
others.
On the contrary, The Philosopher reckons it with other special virtues
(Ethic. ii, 7; iv 2).
I answer that, It belongs to magnificence to do [facere] something
great, as its name implies [magnificence= magna facere---i.e. to make
great things]. Now "facere" may be taken in two ways, in a strict
sense, and in a broad sense. Strictly "facere" means to work something
in external matter, for instance to make a house, or something of the
kind; in a broad sense "facere" is employed to denote any action,