# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 297: Whether counsel should be reckoned among the gifts of the Holy Ghost?

Objection 1: It would seem that counsel should not be reckoned among
the gifts of the Holy Ghost. The gifts of the Holy Ghost are given as a
help to the virtues, according to Gregory (Moral. ii, 49). Now for the
purpose of taking counsel, man is sufficiently perfected by the virtue
of prudence, or even of {euboulia} (deliberating well), as is evident
from what has been said ([2799]Q[47], A[1], ad 2;[2800] Q[51],
AA[1],2). Therefore counsel should not be reckoned among the gifts of
the Holy Ghost.
Objection 2: Further, the difference between the seven gifts of the
Holy Ghost and the gratuitous graces seems to be that the latter are
not given to all, but are divided among various people, whereas the
gifts of the Holy Ghost are given to all who have the Holy Ghost. But
counsel seems to be one of those things which are given by the Holy
Ghost specially to certain persons, according to 1 Macc. 2:65: "Behold
. . . your brother Simon is a man of counsel." Therefore counsel should
be numbered among the gratuitous graces rather than among the seven
gifts of the Holy Ghost.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Rom. 8:14): "Whosoever are led by
the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God." But counselling is not
consistent with being led by another. Since then the gifts of the Holy
Ghost are most befitting the children of God, who "have received the
spirit of adoption of sons," it would seem that counsel should not be
numbered among the gifts of the Holy Ghost.
On the contrary, It is written (Is. 11:2): "(The Spirit of the Lord)
shall rest upon him . . . the spirit of counsel, and of fortitude."
I answer that, As stated above ([2801]FS, Q[68], A[1]), the gifts of
the Holy Ghost are dispositions whereby the soul is rendered amenable
to the motion of the Holy Ghost. Now God moves everything according to
the mode of the thing moved: thus He moves the corporeal creature
through time and place, and the spiritual creature through time, but
not through place, as Augustine declares (Gen. ad lit. viii, 20,22).
Again, it is proper to the rational creature to be moved through the
research of reason to perform any particular action, and this research
is called counsel. Hence the Holy Ghost is said to move the rational
creature by way of counsel, wherefore counsel is reckoned among the
gifts of the Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 1: Prudence or {euboulia} (deliberating well),