# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 126: Whether charity is the form of the virtues?

Objection 1: It would seem that charity is not the true form of the
virtues. Because the form of a thing is either exemplar or essential.
Now charity is not the exemplar form of the other virtues, since it
would follow that the other virtues are of the same species as charity:
nor is it the essential form of the other virtues, since then it would
not be distinct from them. Therefore it is in no way the form of the
virtues.
Objection 2: Further, charity is compared to the other virtues as their
root and foundation, according to Eph. 3:17: "Rooted and founded in
charity." Now a root or foundation is not the form, but rather the
matter of a thing, since it is the first part in the making. Therefore
charity is not the form of the virtues.
Objection 3: Further, formal, final, and efficient causes do not
coincide with one another (Phys. ii, 7). Now charity is called the end
and the mother of the virtues. Therefore it should not be called their
form.
On the contrary, Ambrose [*Lombard, Sent. iii, D, 23] says that charity
is the form of the virtues.
I answer that, In morals the form of an act is taken chiefly from the
end. The reason of this is that the principal of moral acts is the
will, whose object and form, so to speak, are the end. Now the form of
an act always follows from a form of the agent. Consequently, in
morals, that which gives an act its order to the end, must needs give
the act its form. Now it is evident, in accordance with what has been
said [2511](A[7]), that it is charity which directs the acts of all
other virtues to the last end, and which, consequently, also gives the
form to all other acts of virtue: and it is precisely in this sense
that charity is called the form of the virtues, for these are called
virtues in relation to "informed" acts.
Reply to Objection 1: Charity is called the form of the other virtues
not as being their exemplar or their essential form, but rather by way
of efficient cause, in so far as it sets the form on all, in the
aforesaid manner.
Reply to Objection 2: Charity is compared to the foundation or root in
so far as all other virtues draw their sustenance and nourishment
therefrom, and not in the sense that the foundation and root have the
character of a material cause.
Reply to Objection 3: Charity is said to be the end of other virtues,
because it directs all other virtues to its own end. And since a mother
is one who conceives within herself and by another, charity is called
the mother of the other virtues, because, by commanding them, it
conceives the acts of the other virtues, by the desire of the last end.
OF THE SUBJECT OF CHARITY (TWELVE ARTICLES)
We must now consider charity in relation to its subject, under which
head there are twelve points of inquiry:
(1) Whether charity is in the will as its subject?
(2) Whether charity is caused in man by preceding acts or by a Divine
infusion?
(3) Whether it is infused according to the capacity of our natural
gifts?
(4) Whether it increases in the person who has it?
(5) Whether it increases by addition?
(6) Whether it increases by every act?
(7) Whether it increases indefinitely?
(8) Whether the charity of a wayfarer can be perfect?
(9) Of the various degrees of charity;
(10) Whether charity can diminish?
(11) Whether charity can be lost after it has been possessed?
(12) Whether it is lost through one mortal sin?