# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 524: whether by drawing lots, which is called "geomancy"; or by observing

the shapes resulting from molten lead poured into water; or by
observing which of several sheets of paper, with or without writing
upon them, a person may happen to draw; or by holding out several
unequal sticks and noting who takes the greater or the lesser. or by
throwing dice, and observing who throws the highest score; or by
observing what catches the eye when one opens a book, all of which are
named "sortilege."
Accordingly it is clear that there are three kinds of divination. The
first is when the demons are invoked openly, this comes under the head
of "necromancy"; the second is merely an observation of the disposition
or movement of some other being, and this belongs to "augury"; while
the third consists in doing something in order to discover the occult;
and this belongs to "sortilege." Under each of these many others are
contained, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 1: In all the aforesaid there is the same general,
but not the same special, character of sin: for it is much more
grievous to invoke the demons than to do things that deserve the
demons' interference.
Reply to Objection 2: Knowledge of the future or of the occult is the
ultimate end whence divination takes its general formality. But the
various species are distinguished by their proper objects or matters,
according as the knowledge of the occult is sought in various things.
Reply to Objection 3: The things observed by diviners are considered by
them, not as signs expressing what they already know, as happens in
detraction, but as principles of knowledge. Now it is evident that
diversity of principles diversifies the species, even in demonstrative
sciences.