# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 528: whether it can be the cause of future occurrences, or be cognizant of

them.
Accordingly it is to be observed that the cause of dreams is sometimes
in us and sometimes outside us. The inward cause of dreams is twofold:
one regards the soul, in so far as those things which have occupied a
man's thoughts and affections while awake recur to his imagination
while asleep. A such like cause of dreams is not a cause of future
occurrences, so that dreams of this kind are related accidentally to
future occurrences, and if at any time they concur it will be by
chance. But sometimes the inward cause of dreams regards the body:
because the inward disposition of the body leads to the formation of a
movement in the imagination consistent with that disposition; thus a
man in whom there is abundance of cold humors dreams that he is in the
water or snow: and for this reason physicians say that we should take
note of dreams in order to discover internal dispositions.
In like manner the outward cause of dreams is twofold, corporal and
spiritual. It is corporal in so far as the sleeper's imagination is
affected either by the surrounding air, or through an impression of a
heavenly body, so that certain images appear to the sleeper, in keeping
with the disposition of the heavenly bodies. The spiritual cause is
sometimes referable to God, Who reveals certain things to men in their
dreams by the ministry of the angels, according Num. 12:6, "If there be
among you a prophet of the Lord, I will appear to him in a vision, or I
will speak to him in a dream." Sometimes, however, it is due to the
action of the demons that certain images appear to persons in their
sleep, and by this means they, at times, reveal certain future things
to those who have entered into an unlawful compact with them.
Accordingly we must say that there is no unlawful divination in making
use of dreams for the foreknowledge of the future, so long as those
dreams are due to divine revelation, or to some natural cause inward or
outward, and so far as the efficacy of that cause extends. But it will
be an unlawful and superstitious divination if it be caused by a
revelation of the demons, with whom a compact has been made, whether
explicit, through their being invoked for the purpose, or implicit,
through the divination extending beyond its possible limits.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.