# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 774: Whether rape is a species of lust, distinct from seduction?

Objection 1: It would seem that rape is not a species of lust, distinct
from seduction. For Isidore says (Etym. v, 26) that "seduction
[stuprum], or rape, properly speaking, is unlawful intercourse, and
takes its name from its causing corruption: wherefore he that is guilty
of rape is a seducer." Therefore it seems that rape should not be
reckoned a species of lust distinct from seduction.
Objection 2: Further, rape, apparently, implies violence. For it is
stated in the Decretals (XXXVI, qu. 1 [*Append. Grat. ad can. Lex
illa]) that "rape is committed when a maid is taken away by force from
her father's house that after being violated she may be taken to wife."
But the employment of force is accidental to lust, for this essentially
regards the pleasure of intercourse. Therefore it seems that rape
should not be reckoned a determinate species of lust.
Objection 3: Further, the sin of lust is curbed by marriage: for it is
written (1 Cor. 7:2): "For fear of fornication, let every man have his
own wife." Now rape is an obstacle to subsequent marriage, for it was
enacted in the council of Meaux: "We decree that those who are guilty
of rape, or of abducting or seducing women, should not have those women
in marriage, although they should have subsequently married them with
the consent of their parents." Therefore rape is not a determinate
species of lust distinct from seduction.
Objection 4: Further, a man may have knowledge of his newly married
wife without committing a sin of lust. Yet he may commit rape if he
take her away by force from her parents' house, and have carnal
knowledge of her. Therefore rape should not be reckoned a determinate
species of lust.
On the contrary, Rape is unlawful sexual intercourse, as Isidore states
(Etym. v, 26). But this pertains to the sin of lust. Therefore rape is
a species of lust.
I answer that, Rape, in the sense in which we speak of it now, is a
species of lust: and sometimes it coincides with seduction; sometimes
there is rape without seduction, and sometimes seduction without rape.
They coincide when a man employs force in order unlawfully to violate a
virgin. This force is employed sometimes both towards the virgin and
towards her father; and sometimes towards the father and not to the
virgin, for instance if she allows herself to be taken away by force
from her father's house. Again, the force employed in rape differs in
another way, because sometimes a maid is taken away by force from her
parents' house, and is forcibly violated: while sometimes, though taken
away by force, she is not forcibly violated, but of her own consent,