# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 703: whether in accomplishing an arduous work, or in enduring grievous evil.

In this sense fortitude denotes a special or general virtue, as stated
above (Q[123], A[2]).
Yet furthermore man's mind is moved by the Holy Ghost, in order that he
may attain the end of each work begun, and avoid whatever perils may
threaten. This surpasses human nature: for sometimes it is not in a
man's power to attain the end of his work, or to avoid evils or
dangers, since these may happen to overwhelm him in death. But the Holy
Ghost works this in man, by bringing him to everlasting life, which is
the end of all good deeds, and the release from all perils. A certain
confidence of this is infused into the mind by the Holy Ghost Who
expels any fear of the contrary. It is in this sense that fortitude is
reckoned a gift of the Holy Ghost. For it has been stated above
([3418]FS, Q[68], AA[1],2) that the gifts regard the motion of the mind
by the Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 1: Fortitude, as a virtue, perfects the mind in the
endurance of all perils whatever; but it does not go so far as to give
confidence of overcoming all dangers: this belongs to the fortitude
that is a gift of the Holy Ghost.
Reply to Objection 2: The gifts have not the same acts in heaven as on
the way: for they exercise acts in connection with the enjoyment of the
end. Hence the act of fortitude there is to enjoy full security from
toil and evil.
Reply to Objection 3: The gift of fortitude regards the virtue of
fortitude not only because it consists in enduring dangers, but also
inasmuch as it consists in accomplishing any difficult work. Wherefore
the gift of fortitude is directed by the gift of counsel, which seems
to be concerned chiefly with the greater goods.