# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 395: whether a man injures another voluntarily or not. Voluntary injury

deserves punishment, involuntary deserves forgiveness. Hence when the
judge becomes aware that a man has made a false accusation, not with a
mind to do harm, but involuntarily through ignorance or a just error,
he does not impose the punishment of retaliation.
Reply to Objection 2: He who accuses wrongfully sins both against the
person of the accused and against the commonwealth; wherefore he is
punished on both counts. This is the meaning of what is written (Dt.
19:18-20): "And when after most diligent inquisition, they shall find
that the false witness hath told a lie against his brother: then shall
render to him as he meant to do to his brother," and this refers to the
injury done to the person: and afterwards, referring to the injury done
to the commonwealth, the text continues: "And thou shalt take away the
evil out of the midst of thee, that others hearing may fear, and may
not dare to do such things." Specially, however, does he injure the
person of the accused, if he accuse him falsely. Wherefore the accused,
if innocent, may condone the injury done to himself, particularly if
the accusation were made not calumniously but out of levity of mind.
But if the accuser desist from accusing an innocent man, through
collusion with the latter's adversary, he inflicts an injury on the
commonwealth: and this cannot be condoned by the accused, although it
can be remitted by the sovereign, who has charge of the commonwealth.
Reply to Objection 3: The accuser deserves the punishment of
retaliation in compensation for the harm he attempts to inflict on his
neighbor: but the punishment of disgrace is due to him for his
wickedness in accusing another man calumniously. Sometimes the
sovereign remits the punishment, and not the disgrace, and sometimes he
removes the disgrace also: wherefore the Pope also can remove this
disgrace. When Pope Gelasius says: "We cannot remove the disgrace," he
may mean either the disgrace attaching to the deed [infamia facti], or
that sometimes it is not expedient to remove it, or again he may be
referring to the disgrace inflicted by the civil judge, as Gratian
states (Callist. I, Epist. ad omn. Gall. episc.).
OF SINS COMMITTED AGAINST JUSTICE ON THE PART OF THE DEFENDANT (FOUR ARTICLES)
We must now consider those sins which are committed against justice on
the part of the defendant. Under this head there are four points of
inquiry:
(1) Whether it is a mortal sin to deny the truth which would lead to
one's condemnation?
(2) Whether it is lawful to defend oneself with calumnies?
(3) Whether it is lawful to escape condemnation by appealing?
(4) Whether it is lawful for one who has been condemned to defend
himself by violence if he be able to do so?