# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 451: whether they be its equals or its superiors. Now both of these, namely,

to command and to ask or beseech, imply a certain ordering, seeing that
man proposes something to be effected by something else, wherefore they
pertain to the reason to which it belongs to set in order. For this
reason the Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 13) that the "reason exhorts us
to do what is best."
Now in the present instance we are speaking of prayer [*This last
paragraph refers to the Latin word 'oratio' [prayer] which originally
signified a speech, being derived in the first instance from 'os,'
'oris' (the mouth).] as signifying a beseeching or petition, in which
sense Augustine [*Rabanus, De Univ. vi, 14]: says (De Verb. Dom.) that
"prayer is a petition," and Damascene states (De Fide Orth. iii, 24)
that "to pray is to ask becoming things of God." Accordingly it is
evident that prayer, as we speak of it now, is an act of reason.
Reply to Objection 1: The Lord is said to hear the desire of the poor,
either because desire is the cause of their petition, since a petition
is like the interpreter of a desire, or in order to show how speedily
they are heard, since no sooner do the poor desire something than God
hears them before they put up a prayer, according to the saying of Is.
65:24, "And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will hear."
Reply to Objection 2: As stated above ([3007]FP, Q[82], A[4]; [3008]FS,
Q[9], A[1], ad 3), the will moves the reason to its end: wherefore
nothing hinders the act of reason, under the motion of the will, from
tending to an end such as charity which is union with God. Now prayer
tends to God through being moved by the will of charity, as it were,
and this in two ways. First, on the part of the object of our petition,
because when we pray we ought principally to ask to be united to God,
according to Ps. 26:4, "One thing I have asked of the Lord, this will I
seek after, that I may dwell in the house of the Lord all the days of
my life." Secondly, on the part of the petitioner, who ought to
approach the person whom he petitions, either locally, as when he
petitions a man, or mentally, as when he petitions God. Hence Dionysius
says (Div. Nom. iii) that "when we call upon God in our prayers, we
unveil our mind in His presence": and in the same sense Damascene says
(De Fide Orth. iii, 24) that "prayer is the raising up of the mind to
God."
Reply to Objection 3: These three acts belong to the speculative
reason, but to the practical reason it belongs in addition to cause
something by way of command or of petition, as stated above.