# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 386: Whether a man can justly judge one who is not subject to his jurisdiction?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man can justly judge one who is not
subject to his jurisdiction. For it is stated (Dan. 13) that Daniel
sentenced the ancients who were convicted of bearing false witness. But
these ancients were not subject to Daniel; indeed they were judges of
the people. Therefore a man may lawfully judge one that is not subject
to his jurisdiction.
Objection 2: Further, Christ was no man's subject, indeed He was "King
of kings and Lord of lords" (Apoc. 19:16). Yet He submitted to the
judgment of a man. Therefore it seems that a man may lawfully judge one
that is not subject to his jurisdiction.
Objection 3: Further, according to the law [*Cap. Licet ratione, de
Foro Comp.] a man is tried in this or that court according to his kind
of offense. Now sometimes the defendant is not the subject of the man
whose business it is to judge in that particular place, for instance
when the defendant belongs to another diocese or is exempt. Therefore
it seems that a man may judge one that is not his subject.
On the contrary, Gregory [*Regist. xi, epist. 64] in commenting on Dt.
23:25, "If thou go into thy friend's corn," etc. says: "Thou mayest not
put the sickle of judgment to the corn that is entrusted to another."
I answer that, A judge's sentence is like a particular law regarding
some particular fact. Wherefore just as a general law should have
coercive power, as the Philosopher states (Ethic. x, 9), so too the
sentence of a judge should have coercive power, whereby either party is
compelled to comply with the judge's sentence; else the judgment would
be of no effect. Now coercive power is not exercised in human affairs,
save by those who hold public authority: and those who have this
authority are accounted the superiors of those over whom they preside