# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 686: whether it passes into external matter, as to burn or cut, or remain in

the agent, as to understand or will.
Accordingly if magnificence be taken to denote the doing of something
great, the doing [factio] being understood in the strict sense, it is
then a special virtue. For the work done is produced by act: in the use
of which it is possible to consider a special aspect of goodness,
namely that the work produced [factum] by the act is something great,
namely in quantity, value, or dignity, and this is what magnificence
does. In this way magnificence is a special virtue.
If, on the other hand, magnificence take its name from doing something
great, the doing [facere] being understood in a broad sense, it is not
a special virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: It belongs to every perfect virtue to do
something great in the genus of that virtue, if "doing" [facere] be
taken in the broad sense, but not if it be taken strictly, for this is
proper to magnificence.
Reply to Objection 2: It belongs to magnanimity not only to tend to
something great, but also to do great works in all the virtues, either
by making [faciendo], or by any kind of action, as stated in Ethic. iv,
3: yet so that magnanimity, in this respect, regards the sole aspect of
great, while the other virtues which, if they be perfect, do something
great, direct their principal intention, not to something great, but to
that which is proper to each virtue: and the greatness of the thing
done is sometimes consequent upon the greatness of the virtue.
On the other hand, it belongs to magnificence not only to do something
great, "doing" [facere] being taken in the strict sense, but also to
tend with the mind to the doing of great things. Hence Tully says (De
Invent. Rhet. ii) that "magnificence is the discussing and
administering of great and lofty undertakings, with a certain broad and
noble purpose of mind, discussion" referring to the inward intention,
and "administration" to the outward accomplishment. Wherefore just as
magnanimity intends something great in every matter, it follows that
magnificence does the same in every work that can be produced in
external matter [factibili].
Reply to Objection 3: The intention of magnificence is the production
of a great work. Now works done by men are directed to an end: and no
end of human works is so great as the honor of God: wherefore
magnificence does a great work especially in reference to the Divine
honor. Wherefore the Philosopher says (Ethic. iv, 2) that "the most
commendable expenditure is that which is directed to Divine
sacrifices": and this is the chief object of magnificence. For this
reason magnificence is connected with holiness, since its chief effect
is directed to religion or holiness.