# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 321: Whether the prohibitive precepts relating to the vices opposed to prudence

are fittingly propounded in the Old Law?
Objection 1: It would seem that the prohibitive precepts relating to
the vices opposed to prudence are unfittingly propounded in the Old
Law. For such vices as imprudence and its parts which are directly
opposed to prudence are not less opposed thereto, than those which bear
a certain resemblance to prudence, such as craftiness and vices
connected with it. Now the latter vices are forbidden in the Law: for
it is written (Lev. 19:13): "Thou shalt not calumniate thy neighbor,"
and (Dt. 25:13): "Thou shalt not have divers weights in thy bag, a
greater and a less." Therefore there should have also been prohibitive
precepts about the vices directly opposed to prudence.
Objection 2: Further, there is room for fraud in other things than in
buying and selling. Therefore the Law unfittingly forbade fraud solely
in buying and selling.
Objection 3: Further, there is the same reason for prescribing an act
of virtue as for prohibiting the act of a contrary vice. But acts of
prudence are not prescribed in the Law. Therefore neither should any
contrary vices have been forbidden in the Law.
The contrary, however, appears from the precepts of the Law which are
quoted in the first objection.
I answer that, As stated above [2835](A[1]), justice, above all,
regards the aspect of something due, which is a necessary condition for
a precept, because justice tends to render that which is due to
another, as we shall state further on (Q[58], A[2]). Now craftiness, as
to its execution, is committed chiefly in matters of justice, as stated
above (Q[55], A[8]): and so it was fitting that the Law should contain
precepts forbidding the execution of craftiness, in so far as this
pertains to injustice, as when a man uses guile and fraud in
calumniating another or in stealing his goods.
Reply to Objection 1: Those vices that are manifestly opposed to
prudence, do not pertain to injustice in the same way as the execution
of craftiness, and so they are not forbidden in the Law, as fraud and
guile are, which latter pertain to injustice
Reply to Objection 2: All guile and fraud committed in matters of
injustice, can be understood to be forbidden in the prohibition of
calumny (Lev. 19:13). Yet fraud and guile are wont to be practiced
chiefly in buying and selling, according to Ecclus. 26:28, "A huckster
shall not be justified from the sins of the lips": and it is for this
reason that the Law contained a special precept forbidding fraudulent
buying and selling.
Reply to Objection 3: All the precepts of the Law that relate to acts
of justice pertain to the execution of prudence, even as the precepts
prohibitive of stealing, calumny and fraudulent selling pertain to the
execution of craftiness.
OF RIGHT (FOUR ARTICLES)
After considering prudence we must in due sequence consider justice,
the consideration of which will be fourfold:
(1) Of justice;
(2) Of its parts;
(3) Of the corresponding gift;
(4) Of the precepts relating to justice.
Four points will have to be considered about justice: (1) Right; (2)
Justice itself; (3) Injustice; (4) Judgment.
Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:
(1) Whether right is the object of justice?
(2) Whether right is fittingly divided into natural and positive right?
(3) Whether the right of nations is the same as natural right?
(4) Whether right of dominion and paternal right are distinct species?