# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 394: Whether an accuser who fails to prove his indictment is bound to the

punishment of retaliation?
Objection 1: It would seem that the accuser who fails to prove his
indictment is not bound to the punishment of retaliation. For sometimes
a man is led by a just error to make an accusation, in which case the
judge acquit the accuser, as stated in Decret. II, qu. iii. [*Append.
Grat., ad can. Si quem poenituerit.] Therefore the accuser who fails to
prove his indictment is not bound to the punishment of retaliation.
Objection 2: Further, if the punishment of retaliation ought to be
inflicted on one who has accused unjustly, this will be on account of
the injury he has done to someone---but not on account of any injury
done to the person of the accused, for in that case the sovereign could
not remit this punishment, nor on account of an injury to the
commonwealth, because then the accused could not acquit him. Therefore
the punishment of retaliation is not due to one who has failed to prove
his accusation.
Objection 3: Further, the one same sin does not deserve a twofold
punishment, according to Nahum 1:9 [*Septuagint version]: "God shall
not judge the same thing a second time." But he who fails to prove his
accusation, incurs the punishment due to defamation [*Can. Infames,
caus. vi, qu. 1], which punishment even the Pope seemingly cannot
remit, according to a statement of Pope Gelasius [*Callist. I, Epist.
ad omn. Gall. episc.]: "Although we are able to save souls by Penance,
we are unable to remove the defamation." Therefore he is not bound to
suffer the punishment of retaliation.
On the contrary, Pope Hadrian I says (Cap. lii): "He that fails to
prove his accusation, must himself suffer the punishment which his
accusation inferred."
I answer that, As stated above [2932](A[2]), in a case, where the
procedure is by way of accusation, the accuser holds the position of a
party aiming at the punishment of the accused. Now the duty of the
judge is to establish the equality of justice between them: and the
equality of justice requires that a man should himself suffer whatever
harm he has intended to be inflicted on another, according to Ex.
21:24, "Eye for eye, tooth for tooth." Consequently it is just that he
who by accusing a man has put him in danger of being punished severely,
should himself suffer a like punishment.
Reply to Objection 1: As the Philosopher says (Ethic. v, 5) justice
does not always require counterpassion, because it matters considerably