# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 150: Whether four things are rightly reckoned as to be loved out of charity, viz.

God, our neighbor, our body and ourselves?
Objection 1: It would seem that these four things are not rightly
reckoned as to be loved out of charity, to wit: God, our neighbor, our
body, and ourselves. For, as Augustine states (Tract. super Joan.
lxxxiii), "he that loveth not God, loveth not himself." Hence love of
oneself is included in the love of God. Therefore love of oneself is
not distinct from the love of God.
Objection 2: Further, a part ought not to be condivided with the whole.
But our body is part of ourselves. Therefore it ought not to be
condivided with ourselves as a distinct object of love.
Objection 3: Further, just as a man has a body, so has his neighbor.
Since then the love with which a man loves his neighbor, is distinct
from the love with which a man loves himself, so the love with which a
man loves his neighbor's body, ought to be distinct from the love with
which he loves his own body. Therefore these four things are not
rightly distinguished as objects to be loved out of charity.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Doctr. Christ. i, 23): "There are
four things to be loved; one which is above us," namely God, "another,
which is ourselves, a third which is nigh to us," namely our neighbor,
"and a fourth which is beneath us," namely our own body.
I answer that, As stated above ([2548]Q[23], AA[1],5), the friendship
of charity is based on the fellowship of happiness. Now, in this
fellowship, one thing is considered as the principle from which
happiness flows, namely God; a second is that which directly partakes
of happiness, namely men and angels; a third is a thing to which
happiness comes by a kind of overflow, namely the human body.
Now the source from which happiness flows is lovable by reason of its
being the cause of happiness: that which is a partaker of happiness,
can be an object of love for two reasons, either through being
identified with ourselves, or through being associated with us in
partaking of happiness, and in this respect, there are two things to be
loved out of charity, in as much as man loves both himself and his
neighbor.
Reply to Objection 1: The different relations between a lover and the
various things loved make a different kind of lovableness. Accordingly,
since the relation between the human lover and God is different from
his relation to himself, these two are reckoned as distinct objects of
love, for the love of the one is the cause of the love of the other, so
that the former love being removed the latter is taken away.
Reply to Objection 2: The subject of charity is the rational mind that
can be capable of obtaining happiness, to which the body does not reach
directly, but only by a kind of overflow. Hence, by his reasonable mind
which holds the first place in him, man, out of charity, loves himself
in one way, and his own body in another.
Reply to Objection 3: Man loves his neighbor, both as to his soul and
as to his body, by reason of a certain fellowship in happiness.
Wherefore, on the part of his neighbor, there is only one reason for
loving him; and our neighbor's body is not reckoned as a special object
of love.
OF THE ORDER OF CHARITY (THIRTEEN ARTICLES)
We must now consider the order of charity, under which head there are
thirteen points of inquiry:
(1) Whether there is an order in charity?
(2) Whether man ought to love God more than his neighbor?
(3) Whether more than himself?
(4) Whether he ought to love himself more than his neighbor?
(5) Whether man ought to love his neighbor more than his own body?
(6) Whether he ought to love one neighbor more than another?
(7) Whether he ought to love more, a neighbor who is better, or one who
is more closely united to him?
(8) Whether he ought to love more, one who is akin to him by blood, or
one who is united to him by other ties?
(9) Whether, out of charity, a man ought to love his son more than his
father ?
(10) Whether he ought to love his mother more than his father?
(11) Whether he ought to love his wife more than his father or mother?
(12) Whether we ought to love those who are kind to us more than those
whom we are kind to?
(13) Whether the order of charity endures in heaven?