# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 930: Whether religious are bound to manual labor?

Objection 1: It would seem that religious are bound to manual labor.
For religious are not exempt from the observance of precepts. Now
manual labor is a matter of precept according to 1 Thess. 4:11, "Work
with your own hands as we commanded you"; wherefore Augustine says (De
oper. Monach. xxx): "But who can allow these insolent men," namely
religious that do no work, of whom he is speaking there, "who disregard
the most salutary admonishment of the Apostle, not merely to be borne
with as being weaker than others, but even to preach as though they
were holier than others." Therefore it would seem that religious are
bound to manual labor.
Objection 2: Further, a gloss [*St. Augustine, (De oper. Monach. xxi)]
on 2 Thess. 3:10, "If any man will not work, neither let him eat,"
says: "Some say that this command of the Apostle refers to spiritual
works, and not to the bodily labor of the farmer or craftsman"; and
further on: "But it is useless for them to try to hide from themselves
and from others the fact that they are unwilling not only to fulfil,
but even to understand the useful admonishments of charity"; and again:
"He wishes God's servants to make a living by working with their
bodies." Now religious especially are called servants of God, because
they give themselves entirely to the service of God, as Dionysius
asserts (Eccl. Hier. vi). Therefore it would seem that they are bound
to manual labor.
Objection 3: Further, Augustine says (De oper. Monach. xvii): "I would
fain know how they would occupy themselves, who are unwilling to work
with their body. We occupy our time, say they, with prayers, psalms,
reading, and the word of God." Yet these things are no excuse, and he
proves this, as regards each in particular. For in the first place, as
to prayer, he says: "One prayer of the obedient man is sooner granted
than ten thousand prayers of the contemptuous": meaning that those are
contemptuous and unworthy to be heard who work not with their hands.
Secondly, as to the divine praises he adds: "Even while working with
their hands they can easily sing hymns to God." Thirdly, with regard to
reading, he goes on to say: "Those who say they are occupied in
reading, do they not find there what the Apostle commanded? What sort
of perverseness is this, to wish to read but not to obey what one
reads?" Fourthly, he adds in reference to preaching [*Cap. xviii]: "If
one has to speak, and is so busy that he cannot spare time for manual
work, can all in the monastery do this? And since all cannot do this,
why should all make this a pretext for being exempt? And even if all
were able, they should do so by turns, not only so that the others may
be occupied in other works, but also because it suffices that one speak
while many listen." Therefore it would seem that religious should not
desist from manual labor on account of such like spiritual works to
which they devote themselves.
Objection 4: Further, a gloss on Lk. 12:33, "Sell what you possess,"
says: "Not only give your clothes to the poor, but sell what you
possess, that having once for all renounced all your possessions for
the Lord's sake, you may henceforth work with the labor of your hands,
so as to have wherewith to live or to give alms." Now it belongs
properly to religious to renounce all they have. Therefore it would
seem likewise to belong to them to live and give alms through the labor
of their hands.
Objection 5: Further, religious especially would seem to be bound to
imitate the life of the apostles, since they profess the state of
perfection. Now the apostles worked with their own hands, according to
1 Cor. 4:12: "We labor, working with our own hands." Therefore it would
seem that religious are bound to manual labor.
On the contrary, Those precepts that are commonly enjoined upon all are
equally binding on religious and seculars. But the precept of manual
labor is enjoined upon all in common, as appears from 2 Thess. 3:6,
"Withdraw yourselves from every brother walking disorderly," etc. (for
by brother he signifies every Christian, according to 1 Cor. 7:12, "If
any brother have a wife that believeth not"). Now it is written in the
same passage (2 Thess. 3:10): "If any man will not work, neither let
him eat." Therefore religious are not bound to manual labor any more
than seculars are.
I answer that, Manual labor is directed to four things. First and
principally to obtain food; wherefore it was said to the first man (Gn.
3:19): "In the sweat of thy face shalt thou eat bread," and it is
written (Ps. 127:2): "For thou shalt eat the labors of thy hands."
Secondly, it is directed to the removal of idleness whence arise many
evils; hence it is written (Ecclus. 33:28,29): "Send" thy slave "to
work, that he be not idle, for idleness hath taught much evil."
Thirdly, it is directed to the curbing of concupiscence, inasmuch as it
is a means of afflicting the body; hence it is written (2 Cor. 6:5,6):
"In labors, in watchings, in fastings, in chastity." Fourthly, it is
directed to almsgiving, wherefore it is written (Eph. 4:28): "He that
stole, let him now steal no more; but rather let him labor, working
with his hands the thing which is good, that he may have something to
give to him that suffereth need." Accordingly, in so far as manual
labor is directed to obtaining food, it comes under a necessity of
precept in so far as it is necessary for that end: since that which is
directed to an end derives its necessity from that end, being, in
effect, so far necessary as the end cannot be obtained without it.
Consequently he who has no other means of livelihood is bound to work
with his hands, whatever his condition may be. This is signified by the
words of the Apostle: "If any man will not work, neither let him eat,"
as though to say: "The necessity of manual labor is the necessity of
meat." So that if one could live without eating, one would not be bound
to work with one's hands. The same applies to those who have no other
lawful means of livelihood: since a man is understood to be unable to
do what he cannot do lawfully. Wherefore we find that the Apostle
prescribed manual labor merely as a remedy for the sin of those who
gained their livelihood by unlawful means. For the Apostle ordered
manual labor first of all in order to avoid theft, as appears from Eph.
4:28, "He that stole, let him now steal no more; but rather let him
labor, working with his hands." Secondly, to avoid the coveting of
others' property, wherefore it is written (1 Thess. 4:11): "Work with
your own hands, as we commanded you, and that you walk honestly towards
them that are without." Thirdly, to avoid the discreditable pursuits
whereby some seek a livelihood. Hence he says (2 Thess. 3:10-12): "When
we were with you, this we declared to you: that if any man will not
work, neither let him eat. For we have heard that there are some among
you who walk disorderly, working not at all, but curiously meddling"
(namely, as a gloss explains it, "who make a living by meddling in
unlawful things). Now we charge them that are such, and beseech them .
. . that working with silence, they would eat their own bread." Hence
Jerome states (Super epist. ad Galat. [*Preface to Bk. ii of
Commentary]) that the Apostle said this "not so much in his capacity of
teacher as on account of the faults of the people."
It must, however, be observed that under manual labor are comprised all
those human occupations whereby man can lawfully gain a livelihood,