# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 729: Whether abstinence is a special virtue?

Objection 1: It would seem that abstinence is not a special virtue. For
every virtue is praiseworthy by itself. But abstinence is not
praiseworthy by itself; for Gregory says (Pastor. iii, 19) that "the
virtue of abstinence is praised only on account of the other virtues."
Therefore abstinence is not a special virtue.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine [*Fulgentius] says (De Fide ad Pet.
xlii) that "the saints abstain from meat and drink, not that any
creature of God is evil, but merely in order to chastise the body." Now
this belongs to chastity, as its very name denotes. Therefore
abstinence is not a special virtue distinct from chastity.
Objection 3: Further, as man should be content with moderate meat, so
should he be satisfied with moderate clothes, according to 1 Tim. 6:8,
"Having food, and wherewith to be covered, with these we should be
[Vulg.: 'are'] content." Now there is no special virtue in being
content with moderate clothes. Neither, therefore, is there in
abstinence which moderates food.
On the contrary, Macrobius [*In Somn. Scip. i, 8] reckons abstinence as
a special part of temperance.
I answer that, As stated above ([3475]Q[136], A[1];[3476] Q[141], A[3])
moral virtue maintains the good of reason against the onslaught of the
passions: hence whenever we find a special motive why a passion departs
from the good of reason, there is need of a special virtue. Now
pleasures of the table are of a nature to withdraw man from the good of
reason, both because they are so great, and because food is necessary
to man who needs it for the maintenance of life, which he desires above
all other things. Therefore abstinence is a special virtue.
Reply to Objection 1: Virtues are of necessity connected together, as
stated above ([3477]FS, Q[65], A[1]). Wherefore one virtue receives
help and commendation from another, as justice from fortitude.
Accordingly in this way the virtue of abstinence receives commendation
on account of the other virtues.
Reply to Objection 2: The body is chastised by means of abstinence, not
only against the allurements of lust, but also against those of
gluttony: since by abstaining a man gains strength for overcoming the
onslaughts of gluttony, which increase in force the more he yields to
them. Yet abstinence is not prevented from being a special virtue
through being a help to chastity, since one virtue helps another.
Reply to Objection 3: The use of clothing was devised by art, whereas
the use of food is from nature. Hence it is more necessary to have a
special virtue for the moderation of food than for the moderation of
clothing.
OF FASTING (EIGHT ARTICLES)
We must now consider fasting: under which head there are eight points
of inquiry:
(1) Whether fasting is an act of virtue?
(2) Of what virtue is it the act?
(3) Whether it is a matter of precept?
(4) Whether anyone is excused from fulfilling this precept?
(5) The time of fasting;
(6) Whether it is requisite for fasting to eat but once?
(7) The hour of eating for those who fast;
(8) The meats from which it is necessary to abstain.