# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 543: Whether he sins who demands an oath of a perjurer?

Objection 1: It would seem that he who demands an oath of a perjurer
commits a sin. Either he knows that he swears truly, or he knows that
he swears falsely. If he knows him to swear truly, it is useless for
him to demand an oath: and if he believes him to swear falsely, for his
own part he leads him into sin. Therefore nowise seemingly should one
enjoin an oath on another person.
Objection 2: Further, to receive an oath from a person is less than to
impose an oath on him. Now it would seem unlawful to receive an oath
from a person, especially if he swear falsely, because he would then
seem to consent in his sin. Much less therefore would it seem lawful to
impose an oath on one who swears falsely.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Lev. 5:1): "If anyone sin, and
hear the voice of one swearing falsely [*'Falsely' is not in the
Vulgate'], and is a witness either because he himself hath seen, or is
privy to it: if he do not utter it, he shall bear his iniquity." Hence
it would seem that when a man knows another to be swearing falsely, he
is bound to denounce him. Therefore it is not lawful to demand an oath
of such a man.
Objection 4: On the other hand, Just as it is a sin to swear falsely so
is it to swear by false gods. Yet it is lawful to take advantage of an
oath of one who has sworn by false gods, as Augustine says (ad Public.
Ep. xlvii). Therefore it is lawful to demand an oath from one who
swears falsely.
I answer that, As regards a person who demands an oath from another, a
distinction would seem to be necessary. For either he demands the oath
on his own account and of his own accord, or he demands it on account
of the exigencies of a duty imposed on him. If a man demands an oath on
his own account as a private individual, we must make a distinction, as
does Augustine (de Perjuriis. serm. clxxx): "For if he knows not that
the man will swear falsely, and says to him accordingly: 'Swear to me'
in order that he may be credited, there is no sin: yet it is a human
temptation" (because, to wit, it proceeds from his weakness in doubting