# Terceira Parte (TP)
## Capítulo 492: Whether the seminal loss that occurs during sleep hinders anyone from

receiving this sacrament?
Objection 1: It seems that seminal loss does not hinder anyone from
receiving the body of Christ: because no one is prevented from
receiving the body of Christ except on account of sin. But seminal loss
happens without sin: for Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii) that "the
same image that comes into the mind of a speaker may present itself to
the mind of the sleeper, so that the latter be unable to distinguish
the image from the reality, and is moved carnally and with the result
that usually follows such motions; and there is as little sin in this
as there is in speaking and therefore thinking about such things."
Consequently these motions do not prevent one from receiving this
sacrament.
Objection 2: Further, Gregory says in a Letter to Augustine, Bishop of
the English (Regist. xi): "Those who pay the debt of marriage not from
lust, but from desire to have children, should be left to their own
judgment, as to whether they should enter the church and receive the
mystery of our Lord's body, after such intercourse: because they ought
not to be forbidden from receiving it, since they have passed through
the fire unscorched."
From this it is evident that seminal loss even of one awake, if it be
without sin, is no hindrance to receiving the body of Christ.
Consequently, much less is it in the case of one asleep.
Objection 3: Further, these movements of the flesh seem to bring with
them only bodily uncleanness. But there are other bodily defilements
which according to the Law forbade entrance into the holy places, yet
which under the New Law do not prevent receiving this sacrament: as,
for instance, in the case of a woman after child-birth, or in her
periods, or suffering from issue of blood, as Gregory writes to
Augustine, Bishop of the English (Regist. xi). Therefore it seems that
neither do these movements of the flesh hinder a man from receiving
this sacrament.
Objection 4: Further, venial sin is no hindrance to receiving the
sacrament, nor is mortal sin after repentance. But even supposing that
seminal loss arises from some foregoing sin, whether of intemperance,
or of bad thoughts, for the most part such sin is venial; and if
occasionally it be mortal, a man may repent of it by morning and
confess it. Consequently, it seems that he ought not to be prevented
from receiving this sacrament.
Objection 5: Further, a sin against the Fifth Commandment is greater
than a sin against the Sixth. But if a man dream that he has broken the
Fifth or Seventh or any other Commandment, he is not on that account
debarred from receiving this sacrament. Therefore it seems that much
less should he be debarred through defilement resulting from a dream
against the Sixth Commandment.
On the contrary, It is written (Lev. 15:16): "The man from whom the
seed of copulation goeth out . . . shall be unclean until evening." But
for the unclean there is no approaching to the sacraments. Therefore,
it seems that owing to such defilement of the flesh a man is debarred
from taking this which is the greatest of the sacraments.
I answer that, There are two things to be weighed regarding the
aforesaid movements: one on account of which they necessarily prevent a
man from receiving this sacrament; the other, on account of which they
do so, not of necessity, but from a sense of propriety.
Mortal sin alone necessarily prevents anyone from partaking of this
sacrament: and although these movements during sleep, considered in
themselves, cannot be a mortal sin, nevertheless, owing to their cause,
they have mortal sin connected with them; which cause, therefore, must
be investigated. Sometimes they are due to an external spiritual cause,
viz. the deception of the demons, who can stir up phantasms, as was
stated in the [4650]FP, Q[111], A[3], through the apparition of which,
these movements occasionally follow. Sometimes they are due to an
internal spiritual cause, such as previous thoughts. At other times
they arise from some internal corporeal cause, as from abundance or
weakness of nature, or even from surfeit of meat or drink. Now every
one of these three causes can be without sin at all, or else with
venial sin, or with mortal sin. If it be without sin, or with venial
sin, it does not necessarily prevent the receiving of this sacrament,
so as to make a man guilty of the body and blood of the Lord: but
should it be with mortal sin, it prevents it of necessity.
For such illusions on the part of demons sometimes come from one's not
striving to receive fervently; and this can be either a mortal or a
venial sin. At other times it is due to malice alone on the part of the
demons who wish to keep men from receiving this sacrament. So we read
in the Conferences of the Fathers (Cassian, Collat. xxii) that when a
certain one always suffered thus on those feast-days on which he had to
receive Communion, his superiors, discovering that there was no fault
on his part, ruled that he was not to refrain from communicating on
that account, and the demoniacal illusion ceased.
In like fashion previous evil thoughts can sometimes be without any sin
whatever, as when one has to think of such things on account of
lecturing or debating; and if it be done without concupiscence and
delectation, the thoughts will not be unclean but honest; and yet
defilement can come of such thoughts, as is clear from the authority of
Augustine (OBJ[1]). At other times such thoughts come of concupiscence
and delectation, and should there be consent, it will be a mortal sin:
otherwise it will be a venial sin.
In the same way too the corporeal cause can be without sin, as when it
arises from bodily debility, and hence some individuals suffer seminal
loss without sin even in their wakeful hours; or it can come from the
abundance of nature: for, just as blood can flow without sin, so also
can the semen which is superfluity of the blood, according to the
Philosopher (De Gener. Animal. i). But occasionally it is with sin, as
when it is due to excess of food or drink. And this also can be either
venial or mortal sin; although more frequently the sin is mortal in the
case of evil thoughts on account of the proneness to consent, rather
than in the case of consumption of food and drink. Hence Gregory,
writing to Augustine, Bishop of the English (Regist. xi), says that one
ought to refrain from Communion when this arises from evil thoughts,
but not when it arises from excess of food or drink, especially if
necessity call for Communion. So, then, one must judge from its cause