# Terceira Parte (TP)
## Capítulo 447: Whether the body of Christ be in this sacrament in very truth, or merely as

in a figure or sign?
Objection 1: It seems that the body of Christ is not in this sacrament
in very truth, but only as in a figure, or sign. For it is written (Jn.
6:54) that when our Lord had uttered these words: "Except you eat the
flesh of the Son of Man, and drink His blood," etc., "Many of His
disciples on hearing it said: 'this is a hard saying'": to whom He
rejoined: "It is the spirit that quickeneth; the flesh profiteth
nothing": as if He were to say, according to Augustine's exposition on
Ps. 4 [*On Ps. 98:9]: "Give a spiritual meaning to what I have said.
You are not to eat this body which you see, nor to drink the blood
which they who crucify Me are to spill. It is a mystery that I put
before you: in its spiritual sense it will quicken you; but the flesh
profiteth nothing."
Objection 2: Further, our Lord said (Mat. 28:20): "Behold I am with you
all days even to the consummation of the world." Now in explaining
this, Augustine makes this observation (Tract. xxx in Joan.): "The Lord
is on high until the world be ended; nevertheless the truth of the Lord
is here with us; for the body, in which He rose again, must be in one
place; but His truth is spread abroad everywhere." Therefore, the body
of Christ is not in this sacrament in very truth, but only as in a
sign.
Objection 3: Further, no body can be in several places at the one time.
For this does not even belong to an angel; since for the same reason it
could be everywhere. But Christ's is a true body, and it is in heaven.
Consequently, it seems that it is not in very truth in the sacrament of
the altar, but only as in a sign.
Objection 4: Further, the Church's sacraments are ordained for the
profit of the faithful. But according to Gregory in a certain Homily
(xxviii in Evang.), the ruler is rebuked "for demanding Christ's bodily
presence." Moreover the apostles were prevented from receiving the Holy
Ghost because they were attached to His bodily presence, as Augustine
says on Jn. 16:7: "Except I go, the Paraclete will not come to you"
(Tract. xciv in Joan.). Therefore Christ is not in the sacrament of the
altar according to His bodily presence.
On the contrary, Hilary says (De Trin. viii): "There is no room for
doubt regarding the truth of Christ's body and blood; for now by our
Lord's own declaring and by our faith His flesh is truly food, and His
blood is truly drink." And Ambrose says (De Sacram. vi): "As the Lord
Jesus Christ is God's true Son so is it Christ's true flesh which we
take, and His true blood which we drink."
I answer that, The presence of Christ's true body and blood in this
sacrament cannot be detected by sense, nor understanding, but by faith
alone, which rests upon Divine authority. Hence, on Lk. 22:19: "This is
My body which shall be delivered up for you," Cyril says: "Doubt not