# Terceira Parte (TP)
## Capítulo 100: Whether Christ was at once a wayfarer and a comprehensor?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ was not at once a wayfarer and a
comprehensor. For it belongs to a wayfarer to be moving toward the end
of beatitude, and to a comprehensor it belongs to be resting in the
end. Now to be moving towards the end and to be resting in the end
cannot belong to the same. Therefore Christ could not be at once
wayfarer and comprehensor.
Objection 2: Further, to tend to beatitude, or to obtain it, does not
pertain to man's body, but to his soul; hence Augustine says (Ep. ad
Dios. cxviii) that "upon the inferior nature, which is the body, there
overflows, not indeed the beatitude which belongs to such as enjoy and
understand, the fulness of health, i.e. the vigor of incorruption." Now
although Christ had a passible body, He fully enjoyed God in His mind.
Therefore Christ was not a wayfarer but a comprehensor.
Objection 3: Further, the Saints, whose souls are in heaven and whose
bodies are in the tomb, enjoy beatitude in their souls, although their
bodies are subject to death, yet they are called not wayfarers, but
only comprehensors. Hence, with equal reason, would it seem that Christ
was a pure comprehensor and nowise a wayfarer, since His mind enjoyed
God although His body was mortal.
On the contrary, It is written (Jer. 14:8): "Why wilt Thou be as a
stranger in the land, and as a wayfaring man turning in to lodge?"
I answer that, A man is called a wayfarer from tending to beatitude,
and a comprehensor from having already obtained beatitude, according to
1 Cor. 9:24: "So run that you may comprehend [Douay: 'obtain']"; and
Phil. 3:12: "I follow after, if by any means I may comprehend [Douay:
'obtain']". Now man's perfect beatitude consists in both soul and body,
as stated in the [4040]FS, Q[4], A[6]. In the soul, as regards what is
proper to it, inasmuch as the mind sees and enjoys God; in the body,
inasmuch as the body "will rise spiritual in power and glory and
incorruption," as is written 1 Cor. 15:42. Now before His passion
Christ's mind saw God fully, and thus He had beatitude as far as it
regards what is proper to the soul; but beatitude was wanting with
regard to all else, since His soul was passible, and His body both
passible and mortal, as is clear from the above [4041](A[4]; Q[14],
AA[1],2). Hence He was at once comprehensor, inasmuch as He had the
beatitude proper to the soul, and at the same time wayfarer, inasmuch
as He was tending to beatitude, as regards what was wanting to His
beatitude.
Reply to Objection 1: It is impossible to be moving towards the end and
resting in the end, in the same respect; but there is nothing against
this under a different respect---as when a man is at once acquainted
with what he already knows, and yet is a learner with regard to what he
does not know.
Reply to Objection 2: Beatitude principally and properly belongs to the
soul with regard to the mind, yet secondarily and, so to say,
instrumentally, bodily goods are required for beatitude; thus the
Philosopher says (Ethic. i, 8), that exterior goods minister
"organically" to beatitude.
Reply to Objection 3: There is no parity between the soul of a saint
and of Christ, for two reasons: first, because the souls of saints are
not passible, as Christ's soul was; secondly, because their bodies do
nothing by which they tend to beatitude, as Christ by His bodily
sufferings tended to beatitude as regards the glory of His body.
OF THOSE THINGS WHICH ARE APPLICABLE TO CHRIST IN HIS BEING AND BECOMING
(TWELVE ARTICLES)
We must now consider the consequences of the union; and first as to
what belongs to Christ in Himself; secondly, as to what belongs to
Christ in relation with His Father; thirdly, as to what belongs to
Christ in relation to us.
Concerning the first, there occurs a double consideration. The first is
about such things as belong to Christ in being and becoming; the second
regards such things as belong to Christ by reason of unity.
Under the first head there are twelve points of inquiry:
(1) Whether this is true: "God is man"?
(2) Whether this is true: "Man is God"?
(3) Whether Christ may be called a lordly man?
(4) Whether what belongs to the Son of Man may be predicated of the Son
of God, and conversely?
(5) Whether what belongs to the Son of Man may be predicated of the
Divine Nature, and what belongs to the Son of God of the human nature?
(6) Whether this is true: "The Son of God was made man"?
(7) Whether this is true: "Man became God"?
(8) Whether this is true: "Christ is a creature"?
(9) Whether this is true: "This man," pointing out Christ, "began to
be"? or "always was"?
(10) Whether this is true: "Christ as man is a creature"?
(11) Whether this is true: "Christ as man is God"?
(12) Whether this is true: "Christ as man is a hypostasis or person"?