# Suplemento (XP)
## Capítulo 317: whether of the baptizer or of the baptized, it may profit others even

as other meritorious works. On the other hand, the Eucharist is the
sign of ecclesiastical unity, wherefore by reason of the deed done its
effect can pass to another, which is not the case with the other
sacraments.
Reply to Objection 4: According to a gloss this passage may be
expounded in two ways. First, thus: "If the dead rise not again, nor
did Christ rise again, why are they baptized for them? i.e. for sins,
since they are not pardoned if Christ rose not again, because in
Baptism not only Christ's passion but also His resurrection operates,
for the latter is in a sense the cause of our spiritual resurrection."
Secondly, thus: There have been some misguided persons who were
baptized for those who had departed this life without baptism, thinking
that this would profit them: and according to this explanation the
Apostle is speaking, in the above words, merely according to the
opinion of certain persons.
Reply to Objection 5: In the office of the Mass there is not only a
sacrifice but also prayers. Hence the suffrage of the Mass contains two
of the things mentioned by Augustine (De Cura pro Mort. xviii), namely
"prayer" and "sacrifice." As regards the sacrifice offered the Mass
profits equally the departed, no matter in whose honor it be said: and
this is the principal thing done in the Mass. But as regards the
prayers, that Mass is most profitable in which the prayers are
appointed for this purpose. Nevertheless, this defect may be supplied
by the greater devotion, either of the one who says Mass, or of the one
who orders the Mass to be said, or again, by the intercession of the
saint whose suffrage is besought in the Mass.
Reply to Objection 6: This offering of candles or oil may profit the
departed in so far as they are a kind of alms: for they are given for
the worship of the Church or for the use of the faithful.