# Suplemento (XP)
## Capítulo 100: whether this punishment be enjoined or not. The reason why they so

avail is the oneness of the mystical body in which many have performed
works of satisfaction exceeding the requirements of their debts; in
which, too, many have patiently borne unjust tribulations whereby a
multitude of punishments would have been paid, had they been incurred.
So great is the quantity of such merits that it exceeds the entire debt
of punishment due to those who are living at this moment: and this is
especially due to the merits of Christ: for though He acts through the
sacraments, yet His efficacy is nowise restricted to them, but
infinitely surpasses their efficacy.
Now one man can satisfy for another, as we have explained above
([4887]Q[13], A[2]). And the saints in whom this super-abundance of
satisfactions is found, did not perform their good works for this or
that particular person, who needs the remission of his punishment (else
he would have received this remission without any indulgence at all),
but they performed them for the whole Church in general, even as the
Apostle declares that he fills up "those things that are wanting of the
sufferings of Christ . . . for His body, which is the Church" to whom
he wrote (Col. 1:24). These merits, then, are the common property of
the whole Church. Now those things which are the common property of a
number are distributed to the various individuals according to the
judgment of him who rules them all. Hence, just as one man would obtain
the remission of his punishment if another were to satisfy for him, so
would he too if another's satisfactions be applied to him by one who
has the power to do so.
Reply to Objection 1: The remission which is granted by means of
indulgences does not destroy the proportion between punishment and sin,
since someone has spontaneously taken upon himself the punishment due
for another's guilt, as explained above.
Reply to Objection 2: He who gains an indulgence is not, strictly
speaking, absolved from the debt of punishment, but is given the means
whereby he may pay it.
Reply to Objection 3: The effect of sacramental absolution is the
removal of a man's guilt, an effect which is not produced by
indulgences. But he who grants indulgences pays the debt of punishment
which a man owes, out of the common stock of the Church's goods, as
explained above.
Reply to Objection 4: Grace affords a better remedy for the avoidance
of sin than does habituation to (good) works. And since he who gains an
indulgence is disposed to grace through the love which he conceives for
the cause for which the indulgence is granted, it follows that
indulgences provide a remedy against sin. Consequently it is not
harmful to grant indulgences unless this be done without discretion.
Nevertheless those who gain indulgences should be advised, not, on this
account, to omit the penitential works imposed on them, so that they
may derive a remedy from these also, even though they may be quit of
the debt of punishment; and all the more, seeing that they are often
more in debt than they think.