# Primeira Parte da Segunda Parte (FS)
## Capítulo 501: Whether necessary and eternal things are subject to the eternal law?

Objection 1: It would seem that necessary and eternal things are
subject to the eternal law. For whatever is reasonable is subject to
reason. But the Divine will is reasonable, for it is just. Therefore it
is subject to (the Divine) reason. But the eternal law is the Divine
reason. Therefore God's will is subject to the eternal law. But God's
will is eternal. Therefore eternal and necessary things are subject to
the eternal law.
Objection 2: Further, whatever is subject to the King, is subject to
the King's law. Now the Son, according to 1 Cor. 15:28,24, "shall be
subject . . . to God and the Father . . . when He shall have delivered
up the Kingdom to Him." Therefore the Son, Who is eternal, is subject
to the eternal law.
Objection 3: Further, the eternal law is Divine providence as a type.
But many necessary things are subject to Divine providence: for
instance, the stability of incorporeal substances and of the heavenly
bodies. Therefore even necessary things are subject to the eternal law.
On the contrary, Things that are necessary cannot be otherwise, and
consequently need no restraining. But laws are imposed on men, in order
to restrain them from evil, as explained above ([1999]Q[92], A[2]).
Therefore necessary things are not subject to the eternal law.
I answer that, As stated above [2000](A[1]), the eternal law is the
type of the Divine government. Consequently whatever is subject to the
Divine government, is subject to the eternal law: while if anything is
not subject to the Divine government, neither is it subject to the
eternal law. The application of this distinction may be gathered by
looking around us. For those things are subject to human government,
which can be done by man; but what pertains to the nature of man is not
subject to human government; for instance, that he should have a soul,
hands, or feet. Accordingly all that is in things created by God,