# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 870: whether their soul is separated from their body. Therefore Paul too

knew this.
On the contrary, It is written (2 Cor. 12:3): "Whether in the body, or
out of the body, I know not, God knoweth."
I answer that, The true answer to this question must be gathered from
the Apostle's very words, whereby he says he knew something, namely
that he was "rapt even to the third heaven," and that something he knew
not, namely "whether" he were "in the body or out of the body." This
may be understood in two ways. First, the words "whether in the body or
out of the body" may refer not to the very being of the man who was
rapt (as though he knew not whether his soul were in his body or not),
but to the mode of rapture, so that he ignored whether his body besides
his soul, or, on the other hand, his soul alone, were rapt to the third
heaven. Thus Ezechiel is stated (Ezech. 8:3) to have been "brought in
the vision of God into Jerusalem." This was the explanation of a
certain Jew according to Jerome (Prolog. super Daniel.), where he says
that "lastly our Apostle" (thus said the Jew) "durst not assert that he
was rapt in his body, but said: 'Whether in the body or out of the
body, I know not.'"
Augustine, however, disapproves of this explanation (Gen. ad lit. xii,
3 seqq.) for this reason that the Apostle states that he knew he was
rapt even to the third heaven. Wherefore he knew it to be really the
third heaven to which he was rapt, and not an imaginary likeness of the
third heaven: otherwise if he gave the name of third heaven to an
imaginary third heaven, in the same way he might state that he was rapt
in the body, meaning, by body, an image of his body, such as appears in
one's dreams. Now if he knew it to be really the third heaven, it
follows that either he knew it to be something spiritual and
incorporeal, and then his body could not be rapt thither; or he knew it
to be something corporeal, and then his soul could not be rapt thither
without his body, unless it were separated from his body. Consequently
we must explain the matter otherwise, by saying that the Apostle knew
himself to be rapt both in soul and body, but that he ignored how his
soul stood in relation to his body, to wit, whether it were accompanied
by his body or not.
Here we find a diversity of opinions. For some say that the Apostle
knew his soul to be united to his body as its form, but ignored whether
it were abstracted from its senses, or again whether it were abstracted
from the operations of the vegetative soul. But he could not but know
that it was abstracted from the senses, seeing that he knew himself to
be rapt; and as to his being abstracted from the operation of the
vegetative soul, this was not of such importance as to require him to
be so careful in mentioning it. It follows, then, that the Apostle
ignored whether his soul were united to his body as its form, or
separated from it by death. Some, however, granting this say that the
Apostle did not consider the matter while he was in rapture, because he
was wholly intent upon God, but that afterwards he questioned the
point, when taking cognizance of what he had seen. But this also is
contrary to the Apostle's words, for he there distinguishes between the
past and what happened subsequently, since he states that at the
present time he knows that he was rapt "fourteen years ago," and that
at the present time he knows not "whether he was in the body or out of
the body."
Consequently we must assert that both before and after he ignored