# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 364: Whether the sin of respect of persons takes place in judicial sentences?

Objection 1: It would seem that the sin of respect of persons does not
take place in judicial sentences. For respect of persons is opposed to
distributive justice, as stated above [2896](A[1]): whereas judicial
sentences seem to pertain chiefly to commutative justice. Therefore
respect of persons does not take place in judicial sentences.
Objection 2: Further, penalties are inflicted according to a sentence.
Now it is not a sin to respect persons in pronouncing penalties, since
a heavier punishment is inflicted on one who injures the person of a
prince than on one who injures the person of others. Therefore respect
of persons does not take place in judicial sentences.
Objection 3: Further, it is written (Ecclus. 4:10): "In judging be
merciful to the fatherless." But this seems to imply respect of the
person of the needy. Therefore in judicial sentences respect of persons
is not a sin.
On the contrary, It is written (Prov. 18:5): "It is not good to accept
the person in judgment [*Vulg.: 'It is not good to accept the person of
the wicked, to decline from the truth of judgment.']."
I answer that, As stated above ([2897]Q[60], A[1]), judgment is an act
of justice, in as much as the judge restores to the equality of
justice, those things which may cause an opposite inequality. Now
respect of persons involves a certain inequality, in so far as
something is allotted to a person out of that proportion to him in
which the equality of justice consists. Wherefore it is evident that
judgment is rendered corrupt by respect of persons.
Reply to Objection 1: A judgment may be looked at in two ways. First,
in view of the thing judged, and in this way judgment is common to
commutative and distributive justice: because it may be decided by
judgment how some common good is to be distributed among many, and how
one person is to restore to another what he has taken from him.
Secondly, it may be considered in view of the form of judgment, in as
much as, even in commutative justice, the judge takes from one and
gives to another, and this belongs to distributive justice. In this way
respect of persons may take place in any judgment.
Reply to Objection 2: When a person is more severely punished on
account of a crime committed against a greater person, there is no
respect of persons, because the very difference of persons causes, in
that case, a diversity of things, as stated above ([2898]Q[58], A[10],
ad 3;[2899] Q[61], A[2], ad 3).
Reply to Objection 3: In pronouncing judgment one ought to succor the
needy as far as possible, yet without prejudice to justice: else the
saying of Ex. 23:3 would apply: "Neither shalt thou favor a poor man in
judgment."
OF MURDER (EIGHT ARTICLES)
In due sequence we must consider the vices opposed to commutative
justice. We must consider (1) those sins that are committed in relation
to involuntary commutations; (2) those that are committed with regard
to voluntary commutations. Sins are committed in relation to
involuntary commutations by doing an injury to one's neighbor against
his will: and this can be done in two ways, namely by deed or by word.
By deed when one's neighbor is injured either in his own person, or in
a person connected with him, or in his possessions.
We must therefore consider these points in due order, and in the first
place we shall consider murder whereby a man inflicts the greatest
injury on his neighbor. Under this head there are eight points of
inquiry:
(1) Whether it is a sin to kill dumb animals or even plants?(2) Whether
it is lawful to kill a sinner?
(3) Whether this is lawful to a private individual, or to a public
person only?
(4) Whether this is lawful to a cleric?
(5) Whether it is lawful to kill oneself?
(6) Whether it is lawful to kill a just man?
(7) Whether it is lawful to kill a man in self-defense?
(8) Whether accidental homicide is a mortal sin?