# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 527: Whether divination by dreams is unlawful?

Objection 1: It would seem that divination by dreams is not unlawful.
It is not unlawful to make use of divine instruction. Now men are
instructed by God in dreams, for it is written (Job 33:15,16): "By a
dream in a vision by night, when deep sleep falleth upon men, and they
are sleeping in their beds, then He," God to wit, "openeth the ears of
men, and teaching instructeth them in what they are to learn."
Therefore it is not unlawful to make use of divination by dreams.
Objection 2: Further, those who interpret dreams, properly speaking,
make use of divination by dreams. Now we read of holy men interpreting
dreams: thus Joseph interpreted the dreams of Pharaoh's butler and of
his chief baker (Gn. 40), and Daniel interpreted the dream of the king
of Babylon (Dan. 2, 4). Therefore divination by dreams is not unlawful.
Objection 3: Further, it is unreasonable to deny the common experiences
of men. Now it is the experience of all that dreams are significative
of the future. Therefore it is useless to deny the efficacy of dreams
for the purpose of divination, and it is lawful to listen to them.
On the contrary, It is written (Dt. 18:10): "Neither let there be found
among you any one that . . . observeth dreams."
I answer that, As stated above ([3115]AA[2],6), divination is
superstitious and unlawful when it is based on a false opinion.
Wherefore we must consider what is true in the matter of foreknowing
the future from dreams. Now dreams are sometimes the cause of future
occurrences; for instance, when a person's mind becomes anxious through
what it has seen in a dream and is thereby led to do something or avoid
something: while sometimes dreams are signs of future happenings, in so
far as they are referable to some common cause of both dreams and
future occurrences, and in this way the future is frequently known from
dreams. We must, then, consider what is the cause of dreams, and