# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 223: Whether contention is a mortal sin?

Objection 1: It would seem that contention is not a mortal sin. For
there is no mortal sin in spiritual men: and yet contention is to be
found in them, according to Lk. 22:24: "And there was also a strife
amongst" the disciples of Jesus, "which of them should . . . be the
greatest." Therefore contention is not a mortal sin.
Objection 2: Further, no well disposed man should be pleased that his
neighbor commit a mortal sin. But the Apostle says (Phil. 1:17): "Some
out of contention preach Christ," and afterwards he says (Phil. 1:18):
"In this also I rejoice, yea, and will rejoice." Therefore contention
is not a mortal sin.
Objection 3: Further, it happens that people contend either in the
courts or in disputations, without any spiteful purpose, and with a
good intention, as, for example, those who contend by disputing with
heretics. Hence a gloss on 1 Kings 14:1, "It came to pass one day,"
etc. says: "Catholics do not raise contentions with heretics, unless
they are first challenged to dispute." Therefore contention is not a
mortal sin.
Objection 4: Further, Job seems to have contended with God, according
to Job 39:32: "Shall he that contendeth with God be so easily
silenced?" And yet Job was not guilty of mortal sin, since the Lord
said of him (Job 42:7): "You have not spoken the thing that is right
before me, as my servant Job hath." Therefore contention is not always
a mortal sin.
On the contrary, It is against the precept of the Apostle who says (2
Tim. 2:14): "Contend not in words." Moreover (Gal. 5:20) contention is
included among the works of the flesh, and as stated there (Gal. 5:21)
"they who do such things shall not obtain the kingdom of God." Now
whatever excludes a man from the kingdom of God and is against a
precept, is a mortal sin. Therefore contention is a mortal sin.
I answer that, To contend is to tend against some one. Wherefore just
as discord denotes a contrariety of wills, so contention signifies
contrariety of speech. For this reason when a man contrasts various
contrary things in a speech, this is called "contentio," which Tully
calls one of the rhetorical colors (De Rhet. ad Heren. iv), where he
says that "it consists in developing a speech from contrary things,"
for instance: "Adulation has a pleasant beginning, and a most bitter
end."
Now contrariety of speech may be looked at in two ways: first with
regard to the intention of the contentious party, secondly, with regard
to the manner of contending. As to the intention, we must consider