# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 941: Whether religious perfection is diminished by possessing something in

common?
Objection 1: It would seem that religious perfection is diminished by
possessing something in common. For our Lord said (Mat. 19:21): "If
thou wilt be perfect, go sell all [Vulg.: 'what'] thou hast and give to
the poor." Hence it is clear that to lack worldly wealth belongs to the
perfection of Christian life. Now those who possess something in common
do not lack worldly wealth. Therefore it would seem that they do not
quite reach to the perfection of Christian life.
Objection 2: Further, the perfection of the counsels requires that one
should be without worldly solicitude; wherefore the Apostle in giving
the counsel of virginity said (1 Cor. 7:32): "I would have you to be
without solicitude." Now it belongs to the solicitude of the present
life that certain people keep something to themselves for the morrow;
and this solicitude was forbidden His disciples by our Lord (Mat. 6:34)
saying: "Be not . . . solicitous for tomorrow." Therefore it would seem
that the perfection of Christian life is diminished by having something
in common.
Objection 3: Further, possessions held in common belong in some way to
each member of the community; wherefore Jerome (Ep. lx ad Heliod.
Episc.) says in reference to certain people: "They are richer in the
monastery than they had been in the world; though serving the poor
Christ they have wealth which they had not while serving the rich
devil; the Church rejects them now that they are rich, who in the world
were beggars." But it is derogatory to religious perfection that one
should possess wealth of one's own. Therefore it is also derogatory to
religious perfection to possess anything in common.
Objection 4: Further, Gregory (Dial. iii, 14) relates of a very holy
man named Isaac, that "when his disciples humbly signified that he
should accept the possessions offered to him for the use of the
monastery, he being solicitous for the safeguarding of his poverty,
held firmly to his opinion, saying: A monk who seeks earthly
possessions is no monk at all": and this refers to possessions held in
common, and which were offered him for the common use of the monastery.
Therefore it would seem destructive of religious perfection to possess
anything in common.
Objection 5: Further, our Lord in prescribing religious perfection to
His disciples, said (Mat. 10:9,10): "Do not possess gold, nor silver,
nor money in your purses, nor script for your journey." By these words,
as Jerome says in his commentary, "He reproves those philosophers who
are commonly called Bactroperatae [*i.e. staff and scrip bearers], who
as despising the world and valuing all things at naught carried their
pantry about with them." Therefore it would seem derogatory to
religious perfection that one should keep something whether for oneself
or for the common use.
On the contrary, Prosper [*Julianus Pomerius, among the works of
Prosper] says (De Vita Contempl. ix) and his words are quoted (XII, qu.
1, can. Expedit): "It is sufficiently clear both that for the sake of
perfection one should renounce having anything of one's own, and that
the possession of revenues, which are of course common property, is no
hindrance to the perfection of the Church."
I answer that, As stated above ([3829]Q[184], A[3], ad 1;[3830] Q[185],
A[6], ad 1), perfection consists, essentially, not in poverty, but in
following Christ, according to the saying of Jerome (Super Matth. xix,
27): "Since it is not enough to leave all, Peter adds that which is
perfect, namely, 'We have followed Thee,'" while poverty is like an
instrument or exercise for the attainment of perfection. Hence in the
Conferences of the Fathers (Coll. i, 7) the abbot Moses says:
"Fastings, watchings, meditating on the Scriptures, poverty, and
privation of all one's possessions are not perfection, but means of
perfection."
Now the privation of one's possessions, or poverty, is a means of
perfection, inasmuch as by doing away with riches we remove certain
obstacles to charity; and these are chiefly three. The first is the
cares which riches bring with them; wherefore our Lord said (Mat.
13:22): "That which was sown [Vulg.: 'He that received the seed'] among
thorns, is he that heareth the word, and the care of this world, and
the deceitfulness of riches, choketh up the word." The second is the
love of riches, which increases with the possession of wealth;
wherefore Jerome says (Super Matth. xix, 23) that "since it is
difficult to despise riches when we have them, our Lord did not say:
'It is impossible for a rich man to enter the kingdom of heaven,' but:
'It is difficult.'" The third is vainglory or elation which results
from riches, according to Ps. 48:7, "They that trust in their own
strength, and glory in the multitude of their riches."
Accordingly the first of these three cannot be altogether separated
from riches whether great or small. For man must needs take a certain
amount of care in acquiring or keeping external things. But so long as
external things are sought or possessed only in a small quantity, and
as much as is required for a mere livelihood, such like care does not
hinder one much; and consequently is not inconsistent with the
perfection of Christian life. For our Lord did not forbid all care, but
only such as is excessive and hurtful; wherefore Augustine, commenting
on Mat. 6:25, "Be not solicitous for your life, what you shall eat,"
says (De Serm. in Monte [*The words quoted are from De Operibus Monach.
xxvi]): "In saying this He does not forbid them to procure these things
in so far as they needed them, but to be intent on them, and for their
sake to do whatever they are bidden to do in preaching the Gospel." Yet
the possession of much wealth increases the weight of care, which is a
great distraction to man's mind and hinders him from giving himself
wholly to God's service. The other two, however, namely the love of
riches and taking pride or glorying in riches, result only from an
abundance of wealth.
Nevertheless it makes a difference in this matter if riches, whether
abundant or moderate, be possessed in private or in common. For the
care that one takes of one's own wealth, pertains to love of self,
whereby a man loves himself in temporal matters; whereas the care that
is given to things held in common pertains to the love of charity which
"seeketh not her own," but looks to the common good. And since religion
is directed to the perfection of charity, and charity is perfected in
"the love of God extending to contempt of self" [*Augustine, De Civ.
Dei xiv, 28], it is contrary to religious perfection to possess
anything in private. But the care that is given to common goods may
pertain to charity, although it may prove an obstacle to some higher
act of charity, such as divine contemplation or the instructing of
one's neighbor. Hence it is evident that to have excessive riches in
common, whether in movable or in immovable property, is an obstacle to
perfection, though not absolutely incompatible with it; while it is not
an obstacle to religious perfection to have enough external things,