# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 871: whether his soul were separated from his body. Wherefore Augustine

(Gen. ad lit. xii, 5), after discussing the question at length,
concludes: "Perhaps then we must infer that he ignored whether, when he
was rapt to the third heaven, his soul was in his body (in the same way
as the soul is in the body, when we speak of a living body either of a
waking or of a sleeping man, or of one that is withdrawn from his
bodily senses during ecstasy), or whether his soul went out of his body
altogether, so that his body lay dead."
Reply to Objection 1: Sometimes by the figure of synecdoche a part of
man, especially the soul which is the principal part, denotes a man. or
again we might take this to mean that he whom he states to have been
rapt was a man not at the time of his rapture, but fourteen years
afterwards: for he says "I know a man," not "I know a rapt man." Again
nothing hinders death brought about by God being called rapture; and
thus Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 3): "If the Apostle doubted the
matter, who of us will dare to be certain about it?" Wherefore those
who have something to say on this subject speak with more conjecture
than certainty.
Reply to Objection 2: The Apostle knew that either the heaven in
question was something incorporeal, or that he saw something
incorporeal in that heaven; yet this could be done by his intellect,
even without his soul being separated from his body.
Reply to Objection 3: Paul's vision, while he was in rapture, was like
the vision of the blessed in one respect, namely as to the thing seen;
and, unlike, in another respect, namely as to the mode of seeing,
because he saw not so perfectly as do the saints in heaven. Hence
Augustine says (Gen. ad lit. xii, 36): "Although, when the Apostle was
rapt from his carnal senses to the third heaven, he lacked that full
and perfect knowledge of things which is in the angels, in that he knew
not whether he was in the body, or out of the body, this will surely
not be lacking after reunion with the body in the resurrection of the
dead, when this corruptible will put on incorruption."
OF THE GRACE OF TONGUES (TWO ARTICLES)
We must now consider those gratuitous graces that pertain to speech,
and (1) the grace of tongues; (2) the grace of the word of wisdom and
knowledge. Under the first head there are two points of inquiry:
(1) Whether by the grace of tongues a man acquires the knowledge of all
languages?
(2) Of the comparison between this gift and the grace of prophecy.