# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 468: whether he be righteous or sinful."

I answer that, In the sinner, two things are to be considered: his
nature which God loves, and the sin which He hates. Accordingly when a
sinner prays for something as sinner, i.e. in accordance with a sinful
desire, God hears him not through mercy but sometimes through vengeance
when He allows the sinner to fall yet deeper into sin. For "God refuses
in mercy what He grants in anger," as Augustine declares (Tract. lxxiii
in Joan.). On the other hand God hears the sinner's prayer if it
proceed from a good natural desire, not out of justice, because the
sinner does not merit to be heard, but out of pure mercy [*Cf. A[15],
ad 1], provided however he fulfil the four conditions given above,
namely, that he beseech for himself things necessary for salvation,
piously and perseveringly.
Reply to Objection 1: As Augustine states (Tract. xliv super Joan.),
these words were spoken by the blind man before being anointed, i.e.
perfectly enlightened, and consequently lack authority. And yet there
is truth in the saying if it refers to a sinner as such, in which sense
also the sinner's prayer is said to be an abomination.
Reply to Objection 2: There can be no godliness in the sinner's prayer
as though his prayer were quickened by a habit of virtue: and yet his
prayer may be godly in so far as he asks for something pertaining to
godliness. Even so a man who has not the habit of justice is able to
will something just, as stated above ([3030]Q[59], A[2]). And though
his prayer is not meritorious, it can be impetrative, because merit
depends on justice, whereas impetration rests on grace.
Reply to Objection 3: As stated above (A[7], ad 1) the Lord's Prayer is
pronounced in the common person of the whole Church: and so if anyone
say the Lord's Prayer while unwilling to forgive his neighbor's
trespasses, he lies not, although his words do not apply to him
personally: for they are true as referred to the person of the Church,
from which he is excluded by merit, and consequently he is deprived of
the fruit of his prayer. Sometimes, however, a sinner is prepared to
forgive those who have trespassed against him, wherefore his prayers
are heard, according to Ecclus. 28:2, "Forgive thy neighbor if he hath
hurt thee, and then shall thy sins be forgiven to thee when thou
prayest."