# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 942: whether movables or immovables, as suffice for a livelihood, if we

consider poverty in relation to the common end of religious orders,
which is to devote oneself to the service of God. But if we consider
poverty in relation to the special end of any religious order, then
this end being presupposed, a greater or lesser degree of poverty is
adapted to that religious order; and each religious order will be the
more perfect in respect of poverty, according as it professes a poverty
more adapted to its end. For it is evident that for the purpose of the
outward and bodily works of the active life a man needs the assistance
of outward things, whereas few are required for contemplation. Hence
the Philosopher says (Ethic. x, 8) that "many things are needed for
action, and the more so, the greater and nobler the actions are. But
the contemplative man requires no such things for the exercise of his
act: he needs only the necessaries; other things are an obstacle to his
contemplation." Accordingly it is clear that a religious order directed
to the bodily actions of the active life, such as soldiering or the
lodging of guests, would be imperfect if it lacked common riches;
whereas those religious orders which are directed to the contemplative
life are the more perfect, according as the poverty they profess
burdens them with less care for temporal things. And the care of
temporal things is so much a greater obstacle to religious life as the
religious life requires a greater care of spiritual things.
Now it is manifest that a religious order established for the purpose
of contemplating and of giving to others the fruits of one's
contemplation by teaching and preaching, requires greater care of
spiritual things than one that is established for contemplation only.
Wherefore it becomes a religious order of this kind to embrace a
poverty that burdens one with the least amount of care. Again it is
clear that to keep what one has acquired at a fitting time for one's
necessary use involves the least burden of care. Wherefore a threefold
degree of poverty corresponds to the three aforesaid degrees of
religious life. For it is fitting that a religious order which is
directed to the bodily actions of the active life should have an
abundance of riches in common; that the common possession of a
religious order directed to contemplation should be more moderate,
unless the said religious be bound, either themselves or through
others, to give hospitality or to assist the poor; and that those who
aim at giving the fruits of their contemplation to others should have
their life most exempt from external cares; this being accomplished by
their laying up the necessaries of life procured at a fitting time.
This, our Lord, the Founder of poverty, taught by His example. For He
had a purse which He entrusted to Judas, and in which were kept the
things that were offered to Him, as related in Jn. 12:6.
Nor should it be argued that Jerome (Super Matth. xvii, 26) says: "If
anyone object that Judas carried money in the purse, we answer that He
deemed it unlawful to spend the property of the poor on His own uses,"
namely by paying the tax---because among those poor His disciples held
a foremost place, and the money in Christ's purse was spent chiefly on
their needs. For it is stated (Jn. 4:8) that "His disciples were gone
into the city to buy meats," and (Jn. 13:29) that the disciples
"thought, because Judas had the purse, that Jesus had said to him: But
those things which we have need of for the festival day, or that he
should give something to the poor." From this it is evident that to
keep money by, or any other common property for the support of
religious of the same order, or of any other poor, is in accordance
with the perfection which Christ taught by His example. Moreover, after
the resurrection, the disciples from whom all religious orders took
their origin kept the price of the lands, and distributed it according
as each one had need (Acts 4:34,35).
Reply to Objection 1: As stated above ([3831]Q[184], A[3], ad 1), this
saying of our Lord does not mean that poverty itself is perfection, but
that it is the means of perfection. Indeed, as shown above
([3832]Q[186], A[8]), it is the least of the three chief means of
perfection; since the vow of continence excels the vow of poverty, and
the vow of obedience excels them both. Since, however, the means are
sought not for their own sake, but for the sake of the end, a thing is
better, not for being a greater instrument, but for being more adapted
to the end. Thus a physician does not heal the more the more medicine
he gives, but the more the medicine is adapted to the disease.
Accordingly it does not follow that a religious order is the more
perfect, according as the poverty it professes is more perfect, but
according as its poverty is more adapted to the end both common and
special. Granted even that the religious order which exceeds others in
poverty be more perfect in so far as it is poorer, this would not make
it more perfect simply. For possibly some other religious order might
surpass it in matters relating to continence, or obedience, and thus be
more perfect simply, since to excel in better things is to be better
simply.
Reply to Objection 2: Our Lord's words (Mat. 6:34), "Be not solicitous
for tomorrow," do not mean that we are to keep nothing for the morrow;
for the Blessed Antony shows the danger of so doing, in the Conferences
of the Fathers (Coll. ii, 2), where he says: "It has been our
experience that those who have attempted to practice the privation of
all means of livelihood, so as not to have the wherewithal to procure
themselves food for one day, have been deceived so unawares that they
were unable to finish properly the work they had undertaken." And, as
Augustine says (De oper. Monach. xxiii), "if this saying of our Lord,
'Be not solicitous for tomorrow,' means that we are to lay nothing by
for the morrow, those who shut themselves up for many days from the
sight of men, and apply their whole mind to a life of prayer, will be
unable to provide themselves with these things." Again he adds
afterwards: "Are we to suppose that the more holy they are, the less do
they resemble the birds?" And further on (De oper. Monach. xxiv): "For
if it be argued from the Gospel that they should lay nothing by, they
answer rightly: Why then did our Lord have a purse, wherein He kept the
money that was collected? Why, in days long gone by, when famine was
imminent, was grain sent to the holy fathers? Why did the apostles thus
provide for the needs of the saints?"
Accordingly the saying: "Be not solicitous for tomorrow," according to
Jerome (Super Matth.) is to be rendered thus: "It is enough that we
think of the present; the future being uncertain, let us leave it to
God": according to Chrysostom [*Hom. xvi in the Opus Imperfectum,
falsely ascribed to St. John Chrysostom], "It is enough to endure the
toil for necessary things, labor not in excess for unnecessary things":
according to Augustine (De Serm. Dom. in Monte ii, 17): "When we do any
good action, we should bear in mind not temporal things which are
denoted by the morrow, but eternal things."
Reply to Objection 3: The saying of Jerome applies where there are
excessive riches, possessed in private as it were, or by the abuse of
which even the individual members of a community wax proud and wanton.
But they do not apply to moderate wealth, set by for the common use,
merely as a means of livelihood of which each one stands in need. For
it amounts to the same that each one makes use of things pertaining to
the necessaries of life, and that these things be set by for the common
use.
Reply to Objection 4: Isaac refused to accept the offer of possessions,
because he feared lest this should lead him to have excessive wealth,
the abuse of which would be an obstacle to religious perfection. Hence
Gregory adds (Dial. iii, 14): "He was as afraid of forfeiting the
security of his poverty, as the rich miser is careful of his perishable
wealth." It is not, however, related that he refused to accept such
things as are commonly necessary for the upkeep of life.
Reply to Objection 5: The Philosopher says (Polit. i, 5,6) that bread,
wine, and the like are natural riches, while money is artificial
riches. Hence it is that certain philosophers declined to make use of
money, and employed other things, living according to nature. Wherefore
Jerome shows by the words of our Lord, Who equally forbade both, that
it comes to the same to have money and to possess other things
necessary for life. And though our Lord commanded those who were sent
to preach not to carry these things on the way, He did not forbid them
to be possessed in common. How these words of our Lord should be
understood has been shown above (Q[185], A[6] , ad 2; [3833]FS, Q[108],
A[2], ad 3).