# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 450: Whether prayer is an act of the appetitive power?

Objection 1: It would seem that prayer is an act of the appetitive
power. It belongs to prayer to be heard. Now it is the desire that is
heard by God, according to Ps. 9:38, "The Lord hath heard the desire of
the poor." Therefore prayer is desire. But desire is an act of the
appetitive power: and therefore prayer is also.
Objection 2: Further, Dionysius says (Div. Nom. iii): "It is useful to
begin everything with prayer, because thereby we surrender ourselves to
God and unite ourselves to Him." Now union with God is effected by love
which belongs to the appetitive power. Therefore prayer belongs to the
appetitive power.
Objection 3: Further, the Philosopher states (De Anima iii, 6) that
there are two operations of the intellective part. Of these the first
is "the understanding of indivisibles," by which operation we apprehend
what a thing is: while the second is "synthesis" and "analysis,"
whereby we apprehend that a thing is or is not. To these a third may be
added, namely, "reasoning," whereby we proceed from the known to the
unknown. Now prayer is not reducible to any of these operations.
Therefore it is an operation, not of the intellective, but of the
appetitive power.
On the contrary, Isidore says (Etym. x) that "to pray is to speak." Now
speech belongs to the intellect. Therefore prayer is an act, not of the
appetitive, but of the intellective power.
I answer that, According to Cassiodorus [*Comment. in Ps. 38:13]
"prayer [oratio] is spoken reason [oris ratio]." Now the speculative
and practical reason differ in this, that the speculative merely
apprehends its object, whereas the practical reason not only apprehends
but causes. Now one thing is the cause of another in two ways: first
perfectly, when it necessitates its effect, and this happens when the
effect is wholly subject to the power of the cause; secondly
imperfectly, by merely disposing to the effect, for the reason that the
effect is not wholly subject to the power of the cause. Accordingly in
this way the reason is cause of certain things in two ways: first, by
imposing necessity; and in this way it belongs to reason, to command
not only the lower powers and the members of the body, but also human
subjects, which indeed is done by commanding; secondly, by leading up
to the effect, and, in a way, disposing to it, and in this sense the
reason asks for something to be done by things not subject to it,