# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 467: Whether sinners impetrate anything from God by their prayers?

Objection 1: It would seem that sinners impetrate nothing from God by
their prayers. It is written (Jn. 9:31): "We know that God doth not
hear sinners"; and this agrees with the saying of Prov. 28:9, "He that
turneth away his ears from hearing the law, his prayer shall be an
abomination." Now an abominable prayer impetrates nothing from God.
Therefore sinners impetrate nothing from God.
Objection 2: Further, the just impetrate from God what they merit, as
stated above (A[15], ad 2). But sinners cannot merit anything since
they lack grace and charity which is the "power of godliness,"
according to a gloss on 2 Tim. 3:5, "Having an appearance indeed of
godliness, but denying the power thereof." and so their prayer is
impious, and yet piety it required in order that prayer may be
impetrative, as stated above (A[15], ad 2). Therefore sinners impetrate
nothing by their prayers.
Objection 3: Further, Chrysostom [*Hom. xiv in the Opus Imperfectum
falsely ascribed to St. John Chrysostom] says: "The Father is unwilling
to hear the prayer which the Son has not inspired." Now in the prayer
inspired by Christ we say: "Forgive us our trespasses as we forgive
them that trespass against us": and sinners do not fulfil this.
Therefore either they lie in saying this, and so are unworthy to be
heard, or, if they do not say it, they are not heard, because they do
not observe the form of prayer instituted by Christ.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Tract. xliv, super Joan.): "If God
were not to hear sinners, the publican would have vainly said: Lord, be
merciful to me a sinner"; and Chrysostom [*Hom. xviii of the same Opus
Imperfectum] says: "Everyone that asketh shall receive, that is to say