# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 437: Whether religion directs man to God alone?

Objection 1: It would seem that religion does not direct man to God
alone. It is written (James 1:27): "Religion clean and undefiled before
God and the Father is this, to visit the fatherless and widows in their
tribulation, and to keep oneself unspotted from this world." Now "to
visit the fatherless and widows" indicates an order between oneself and
one's neighbor, and "to keep oneself unspotted from this world" belongs
to the order of a man within himself. Therefore religion does not imply
order to God alone.
Objection 2: Further, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei x, 1) that "since in
speaking Latin not only unlettered but even most cultured persons ere
wont to speak of religion as being exhibited, to our human kindred and
relations as also to those who are linked with us by any kind of tie,
that term does not escape ambiguity when it is a question of Divine
worship, so that we be able to say without hesitation that religion is
nothing else but the worship of God." Therefore religion signifies a
relation not only to God but also to our kindred.
Objection 3: Further, seemingly "latria" pertains to religion. Now
"latria signifies servitude," as Augustine states (De Civ. Dei x, 1).
And we are bound to serve not only God, but also our neighbor,
according to Gal. 5:13, "By charity of the spirit serve one another."
Therefore religion includes a relation to one's neighbor also.
Objection 4: Further, worship belongs to religion. Now man is said to
worship not only God, but also his neighbor, according to the saying of
Cato [*Dionysius Cato, Breves Sententiae], "Worship thy parents."
Therefore religion directs us also to our neighbor, and not only to
God.
Objection 5: Further, all those who are in the state of grace are
subject to God. Yet not all who are in a state of grace are called
religious, but only those who bind themselves by certain vows and
observances, and to obedience to certain men. Therefore religion
seemingly does not denote a relation of subjection of man to God.
On the contrary, Tully says (Rhet. ii, 53) that "religion consists in
offering service and ceremonial rites to a superior nature that men
call divine."
I answer that, as Isidore says (Etym. x), "according to Cicero, a man
is said to be religious from 'religio,' because he often ponders over,
and, as it were, reads again [relegit], the things which pertain to the
worship of God," so that religion would seem to take its name from
reading over those things which belong to Divine worship because we
ought frequently to ponder over such things in our hearts, according to
Prov. 3:6, "In all thy ways think on Him." According to Augustine (De
Civ. Dei x, 3) it may also take its name from the fact that "we ought
to seek God again, whom we had lost by our neglect" [*St. Augustine
plays on the words 'reeligere,' i.e. to choose over again, and
'negligere,' to neglect or despise.]. Or again, religion may be derived
from "religare" [to bind together], wherefore Augustine says (De Vera
Relig. 55): "May religion bind us to the one Almighty God." However,