# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 544: whether the man will speak the truth). "This is the evil whereof Our

Lord says (Mat. 5:37): That which is over and above these, is of evil.
But if he knows the man to have done so," i.e. the contrary of what he
swears to, "and yet forces him to swear, he is a murderer: for the
other destroys himself by his perjury, but it is he who urged the hand
of the slayer."
If, on the other hand, a man demands an oath as a public person, in
accordance with the requirements of the law, on the requisition of a
third person: he does not seem to be at fault, if he demands an oath of
a person, whether he knows that he will swear falsely or truly, because
seemingly it is not he that exacts the oath but the person at whose
instance he demands it.
Reply to Objection 1: This argument avails in the case of one who
demands an oath on his own account. Yet he does not always know that
the other will swear truly or falsely, for at times he has doubts about
the fact, and believes he will swear truly. In such a case he exacts an
oath in order that he may be more certain.
Reply to Objection 2: As Augustine says (ad Public. serm. xlvii),
"though we are forbidden to swear, I do not remember ever to have read
in the Holy Scriptures that we must not accept oaths from others."
Hence he that accepts an oath does not sin, except perchance when of
his own accord he forces another to swear, knowing that he will swear
falsely.
Reply to Objection 3: As Augustine says (QQ. Super Lev, qu. i), Moses
in the passage quoted did not state to whom one man had to denounce
another's perjury: wherefore it must be understood that the matter had
to be denounced "to those who would do the perjurer good rather than
harm." Again, neither did he state in what order the denunciation was
to be made: wherefore seemingly the Gospel order should be followed, if
the sin of perjury should be hidden, especially when it does not tend
to another person's injury: because if it did, the Gospel order would
not apply to the case, as stated above ([3136]Q[33], A[7];[3137] Q[68],
A[1]).
Reply to Objection 4: It is lawful to make use of an evil for the sake
of good, as God does, but it is not lawful to lead anyone to do evil.
Consequently it is lawful to accept the oath of one who is ready to
swear by false gods, but it is not lawful to induce him to swear by
false gods. Yet it seems to be different in the case of one who swears
falsely by the true God, because an oath of this kind lacks the good of
faith, which a man makes use of in the oath of one who swears truly by
false gods, as Augustine says (ad Public. Ep. xlvii). Hence when a man
swears falsely by the true God his oath seems to lack any good that one
may use lawfully.
OF SACRILEGE (FOUR ARTICLES)
We must now consider the vices which pertain to irreligion, whereby
sacred things are treated with irreverence. We shall consider (1)
Sacrilege; (2) Simony.
Under the first head there are four points of inquiry:
(1) What is sacrilege?
(2) Whether it is a special sin?
(3) Of the species of sacrilege;
(4) Of the punishment of sacrilege.