# Segunda Parte da Segunda Parte (SS)
## Capítulo 224: whether he contends against the truth, and then he is to be blamed, or

against falsehood, and then he should be praised. As to the manner, we
must consider whether his manner of contending is in keeping with the
persons and the matter in dispute, for then it would be praiseworthy,
hence Tully says (De Rhet. ad Heren. iii) that "contention is a sharp
speech suitable for proof and refutation"---or whether it exceeds the
demands of the persons and matter in dispute, in which case it is
blameworthy.
Accordingly if we take contention as denoting a disclaimer of the truth
and an inordinate manner, it is a mortal sin. Thus Ambrose [*Cf. Gloss.
Ord. in Rom. i, 29] defines contention: "Contention is a disclaimer of
the truth with clamorous confidence." If, however, contention denote a
disavowal of what is false, with the proper measure of acrimony, it is
praiseworthy: whereas, if it denote a disavowal of falsehood, together
with an inordinate manner, it can be a venial sin, unless the
contention be conducted so inordinately, as to give scandal to others.
Hence the Apostle after saying (2 Tim. 2:14): "Contend not in words,"
adds, "for it is to no profit, but to the subverting of the hearers."
Reply to Objection 1: The disciples of Christ contended together, not
with the intention of disclaiming the truth, since each one stood up
for what he thought was true. Yet there was inordinateness in their
contention, because they contended about a matter which they ought not
to have contended about, viz. the primacy of honor; for they were not
spiritual men as yet, as a gloss says on the same passage; and for this
reason Our Lord checked them.
Reply to Objection 2: Those who preached Christ "out of contention,"
were to be blamed, because, although they did not gainsay the truth of
faith, but preached it, yet they did gainsay the truth, by the fact
that they thought they would "raise affliction" to the Apostle who was
preaching the truth of faith. Hence the Apostle rejoiced not in their
contention, but in the fruit that would result therefrom, namely that
Christ would be made known---since evil is sometimes the occasion of
good results.
Reply to Objection 3: Contention is complete and is a mortal sin when,
in contending before a judge, a man gainsays the truth of justice, or
in a disputation, intends to impugn the true doctrine. In this sense
Catholics do not contend against heretics, but the reverse. But when,