# Terceira Parte (TP)
## Capítulo 153: Whether Christ, is the Mediator of God and men?

Objection 1: It would seem that Christ is not, as man, the Mediator of
God and men. For Augustine says (Contra Felic. x): "One is the Person
of Christ: lest there be not one Christ, not one substance; lest, the
office of Mediator being denied, He be called the Son either of God
alone, or merely the Son of a man." But He is the Son of God and man,
not as man, but as at the same time God and man. Therefore neither
should we say that, as man alone, He is Mediator of God and man.
Objection 2: Further, just as Christ, as God, has a common nature with
the Father and the Holy Ghost; so, as man, He has a common nature with
men. But for the reason that, as God, He has the same nature as the
Father and the Holy Ghost, He cannot be called Mediator, as God: for on
1 Tim. 2:5, "Mediator of God and man," a gloss says: "As the Word, He
is not a Mediator, because He is equal to God, and God 'with God,' and
at the same time one God." Therefore neither, as man, can He be called
Mediator, on account of His having the same nature as men.
Objection 3: Further, Christ is called Mediator, inasmuch as He
reconciled us to God: and this He did by taking away sin, which
separated us from God. But to take away sin belongs to Christ, not as
man, but as God. Therefore Christ is our Mediator, not as man, but as
God.
On the contrary, Augustine says (De Civ. Dei ix, 15): "Not because He
is the Word, is Christ Mediator, since He Who is supremely immortal and
supremely happy is far from us unhappy mortals; but He is Mediator, as
man."
I answer that, We may consider two things in a mediator: first, that he
is a mean; secondly, that he unites others. Now it is of the nature of
a mean to be distant from each extreme: while it unites by
communicating to one that which belongs to the other. Now neither of
these can be applied to Christ as God, but only as man. For, as God, He
does not differ from the Father and the Holy Ghost in nature and power
of dominion: nor have the Father and the Holy Ghost anything that the
Son has not, so that He be able to communicate to others something
belonging to the Father or the Holy Ghost, as though it were belonging
to others than Himself. But both can be applied to Him as man. Because,
as man, He is distant both from God, by nature, and from man by dignity
of both grace and glory. Again, it belongs to Him, as man, to unite men
to God, by communicating to men both precepts and gifts, and by
offering satisfaction and prayers to God for men. And therefore He is
most truly called Mediator, as man.
Reply to Objection 1: If we take the Divine Nature from Christ, we
consequently take from Him the singular fulness of grace, which belongs
to Him as the Only-begotten of the Father, as it is written (Jn. 1:14).
From which fulness it resulted that He was established over all men,
and approached nearer to God.
Reply to Objection 2: Christ, as God, is in all things equal to the
Father. But even in the human nature He is above all men. Therefore, as
man, He can be Mediator, but not as God.
Reply to Objection 3: Although it belongs to Christ as God to take away
sin authoritatively, yet it belongs to Him, as man, to satisfy for the
sin of the human race. And in this sense He is called the Mediator of
God and men.
ST. THOMAS AND THE IMMACULATE CONCEPTION (EDITORIAL NOTE)
The privilege of the Virgin-Mother of God and the supreme prerogative
of her Son may be seen from the following diagram:
THE LAW AND THE COURSE OF ORIGINAL SIN UNDER THE LAW . . . . . all
descendants from Adam . . . . . spring from Adam materially and
seminally . . . . . the body lies (not under the guilty, but) under the
effects of original sin . . . . . the stricken body dispositively
causes the soul to contract the guilt of original sin . . . . . all
contract both debt and stain . . . . . all need a Redeemer to destroy
the stain contracted PARTIALLY EXEMPT FROM THE LAW; PRIVILEGE OF
IMMACULATE CONCEPTION . . . . . the Blessed Virgin . . . . . springs
from Adam materially and seminally . . . . . the body lies (not under
the guilt, but) under the effects of original sin . . . . . the
stricken body would have dispositively caused the soul to contract the
guilt of original sin . . . . . the soul at the moment of union with
the body was prevented by the infusion of grace from contracting sin .
. . . . Mary contracted the debt, but not the stain . . . . . Mary
needed a Redeemer to prevent her from contracting the stain WHOLLY
EXEMPT FROM THE LAW; MIRACULOUS CONCEPTION . . . . . Our Blessed Lord .
. . . . springs from Adam materially, not seminally ([4124]Q[31], A[1])
. . . . . His body lay under neither guilt nor effects of original sin
. . . . . the body being entirely free, could not transmit the stain to
His soul . . . . . no preventive grace needed . . . . . Jesus Christ
contracted neither debt nor stain . . . . . Jesus Christ is not
redeemed, but the Redeemer
It will thus be seen how accurately St. Thomas speaks of the "flesh" or
body of our Blessed Lady. For it should be remembered that, according
to St. Thomas, the human body is animated in succession by (1) a
vegetative, (2) a sensitive, and (3) a rational soul. Hence his
assertion that "the flesh of the Blessed Virgin was conceived in
original sin" ([4125]Q[14], A[3], ad 1) means that the body of the
Blessed Virgin, being descended from Adam both materially and
seminally, contracted the bodily defects which are conveyed by seminal
generation, and are the results of the privation of original justice
([4126]Q[69], A[4], ad 3). Before animation, therefore the body of the
Blessed Virgin would not be infected with the guilt of original sin,
because privation of grace can only be in that which is the subject of
grace, viz. the rational soul. Nevertheless, before animation the body
of the Blessed Virgin, being seminally descended from Adam, was such
that it would have been the means of transmitting the taint of original
sin to the rational soul at the very first instant of animation, unless
the grace of the Redeemer intervened and sanctified her soul "in that
self-same instant," thus redeeming her and preventing her from
contracting the guilt of original sin.
Why, then, does St. Thomas say that because the Blessed Virgin was not
sanctified before animation, therefore she could be sanctified only
after animation?
Such a conclusion would hold if it were a question of the order of
Nature: "a thing must be before it is such [prius est esse quam esse
tale]"; and therefore the soul must be, before it is sanctified. But if
St. Thomas held for a posteriority of time, no matter how short, we ask
how it was that he did not perceive the fallacy of the argument, since
it might be neither before nor after, but in the very instant of,
animation.
The question is answered thus: St. Thomas as a Doctor of the Church and
in matters which were not then "de fide," is a witness to the
expression of the faith of his time. Hence his line of argument
coincides with, because it follows, that of St. Bernard, Peter Lombard,
Alexander of Hales, Albert the Great, St. Bonaventure. It was not
likely that St. Thomas would differ from the great masters of his time,
who failed to understand that the grace of redemption might at the same
time be one of preservation and prevention. Nor is it likely that St.
Thomas had any reliable information about the movement* in progress at
that time towards a belief in the Immaculate Conception. [*Principally
in England, where, owing to the influence of St. Anselm (1109), the
doctrine was maintained by Eadmer (1137). Nicolas of St. Albans (1175),
Osbert of Clare (1170), Robert Grosseteste, Bishop of Lincoln (1253),
William of Ware (1300), who was the master of Duns Scotus (1308)]. No
doubt he knew something of it, but the names of its promoters would
have weighed little with him as against those of Bernard, Albert,
Peter, Alexander, and Bonaventure. And it must not be forgotten that
among those who upheld the doctrine of the Immaculate Conception, not a
few ascribed the privilege as being absolute and not one of
preservation and Redemption. Hence it is that St. Thomas insists on two
things: (1) that the Mother of God was redeemed, and (2) that the grace
of her sanctification was a grace of preservation. And, be it remarked
in conclusion, these two points, so much insisted on by St. Thomas, are
at the very basis of the Catholic doctrine of the Immaculate
Conception.
OF THE SANCTIFICATION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN (SIX ARTICLES)
After the foregoing treatise of the union of God and man and the
consequences thereof, it remains for us to consider what things the
Incarnate Son of God did or suffered in the human nature united to Him.
This consideration will be fourfold. For we shall consider: (1) Those
things that relate to His coming into the world; (2) Those things that
relate to the course of His life in this world; (3) His departure from
this world; (4) Those things that concern His exaltation after this
life.
The first of these offers four points of consideration: (1) The
Conception of Christ; (2) His Birth; (3) His Circumcision; (4) His
Baptism. Concerning His Conception there are some points to be
considered: (1) As to the Mother who conceived Him; (2) as to the mode
of His Conception; (3) as to the perfection of the offspring conceived.
On the part of the Mother four points offer themselves to our
consideration: (1) Her sanctification. (2) her virginity; (3) her
espousals; (4) her annunciation, or preparation for conception.
Concerning the first there are six points of inquiry:
(1) Whether the Blessed Virgin, Mother of God, was sanctified before
her birth from the womb?
(2) Whether she was sanctified before animation?
(3) Whether in virtue of this sanctification the fomes of sin was
entirely taken away from her?
(4) Whether the result of this sanctification was that she never
sinned?
(5) Whether in virtue of this sanctification she received the fulness
of grace?
(6) Whether it was proper to her to be thus sanctified?