# Terceira Parte (TP)
## Capítulo 442: whether the bread be unleavened or leavened.

On the contrary, According to the Decretals (Extra, De Celebr. Miss.),
a priest is punished "for presuming to celebrate, using fermented bread
and a wooden cup."
I answer that, Two things may be considered touching the matter of this
sacrament namely, what is necessary, and what is suitable. It is
necessary that the bread be wheaten, without which the sacrament is not
valid, as stated above [4523](A[3]). It is not, however, necessary for
the sacrament that the bread be unleavened or leavened, since it can be
celebrated in either.
But it is suitable that every priest observe the rite of his Church in
the celebration of the sacrament. Now in this matter there are various
customs of the Churches: for, Gregory says: "The Roman Church offers
unleavened bread, because our Lord took flesh without union of sexes:
but the Greek Churches offer leavened bread, because the Word of the
Father was clothed with flesh; as leaven is mixed with the flour."
Hence, as a priest sins by celebrating with fermented bread in the
Latin Church, so a Greek priest celebrating with unfermented bread in a
church of the Greeks would also sin, as perverting the rite of his
Church. Nevertheless the custom of celebrating with unleavened bread is
more reasonable. First, on account of Christ's institution: for He
instituted this sacrament "on the first day of the Azymes" (Mat. 26:17;
Mk. 14:12; Lk. 22:7), on which day there ought to be nothing fermented
in the houses of the Jews, as is stated in Ex. 12:15,19. Secondly,
because bread is properly the sacrament of Christ's body, which was
conceived without corruption, rather than of His Godhead, as will be
seen later ([4524]Q[76], A[1], ad 1). Thirdly, because this is more in
keeping with the sincerity of the faithful, which is required in the
use of this sacrament, according to 1 Cor. 5:7: "Christ our Pasch is
sacrificed: therefore let us feast . . . with the unleavened bread of
sincerity and truth."
However, this custom of the Greeks is not unreasonable both on account
of its signification, to which Gregory refers, and in detestation of
the heresy of the Nazarenes, who mixed up legal observances with the
Gospel.
Reply to Objection 1: As we read in Ex. 12, the paschal solemnity began
on the evening of the fourteenth day of the moon. So, then, after
immolating the Paschal Lamb, Christ instituted this sacrament: hence
this day is said by John to precede the day of the Pasch, while the
other three Evangelists call it "the first day of the Azymes," when
fermented bread was not found in the houses of the Jews, as stated
above. Fuller mention was made of this in the treatise on our Lord's
Passion ([4525]Q[46], A[9], ad 1).
Reply to Objection 2: Those who celebrate the sacrament with unleavened
bread do not intend to follow the ceremonial of the Law, but to conform
to Christ's institution; so they are not Judaizing; otherwise those
celebrating in fermented bread would be Judaizing, because the Jews
offered up fermented bread for the first-fruits.
Reply to Objection 3: Leaven denotes charity on account of one single
effect, because it makes the bread more savory and larger; but it also
signifies corruption from its very nature.
Reply to Objection 4: Since whatever is fermented partakes of
corruption, this sacrament may not be made from corrupt bread, as
stated above (A[3], ad 4); consequently, there is a wider difference
between unleavened and leavened bread than between warm and cold
baptismal water: because there might be such corruption of fermented
bread that it could not be validly used for the sacrament.