# Terceira Parte (TP)
## Capítulo 512: Whether it is permissible to receive communion from heretical,

excommunicate, or sinful priests, and to hear mass said by them?
Objection 1: It seems that one may lawfully receive Communion from
heretical, excommunicate, or even sinful priests, and to hear mass said
by them. Because, as Augustine says (Contra Petilian. iii), "we should
not avoid God's sacraments, whether they be given by a good man or by a
wicked one." But priests, even if they be sinful, or heretics, or
excommunicate, perform a valid sacrament. Therefore it seems that one
ought not to refrain from receiving Communion at their hands, or from
hearing their mass.
Objection 2: Further, Christ's true body is figurative of His mystical
body, as was said above ([4691]Q[67], A[2]). But Christ's true body is
consecrated by the priests mentioned above. Therefore it seems that
whoever belongs to His mystical body can communicate in their
sacrifices.
Objection 3: Further, there are many sins graver than fornication. But
it is not forbidden to hear the masses of priests who sin otherwise.
Therefore, it ought not to be forbidden to hear the masses of priests
guilty of this sin.
On the contrary, The Canon says (Dist. 32): "Let no one hear the mass
of a priest whom he knows without doubt to have a concubine." Moreover,
Gregory says (Dial. iii) that "the faithless father sent an Arian
bishop to his son, for him to receive sacrilegiously the consecrated
Communion at his hands. But, when the Arian bishop arrived, God's
devoted servant rebuked him, as was right for him to do."
I answer that, As was said above ([4692]AA[5],7), heretical,
schismatical, excommunicate, or even sinful priests, although they have
the power to consecrate the Eucharist, yet they do not make a proper
use of it; on the contrary, they sin by using it. But whoever
communicates with another who is in sin, becomes a sharer in his sin.
Hence we read in John's Second Canonical Epistle (11) that "He that
saith unto him, God speed you, communicateth with his wicked works."
Consequently, it is not lawful to receive Communion from them, or to
assist at their mass.
Still there is a difference among the above, because heretics,
schismatics, and excommunicates, have been forbidden, by the Church's
sentence, to perform the Eucharistic rite. And therefore whoever hears
their mass or receives the sacraments from them, commits sin. But not
all who are sinners are debarred by the Church's sentence from using
this power: and so, although suspended by the Divine sentence, yet they
are not suspended in regard to others by any ecclesiastical sentence:
consequently, until the Church's sentence is pronounced, it is lawful
to receive Communion at their hands, and to hear their mass. Hence on 1
Cor. 5:11, "with such a one not so much as to eat," Augustine's gloss
runs thus: "In saying this he was unwilling for a man to be judged by
his fellow man on arbitrary suspicion, or even by usurped extraordinary
judgment, but rather by God's law, according to the Church's ordering,