# Terceira Parte (TP)
## Capítulo 441: Whether this sacrament ought to be made of unleavened bread?

Objection 1: It seems that this sacrament ought not to be made of
unleavened bread. because in this sacrament we ought to imitate
Christ's institution. But Christ appears to have instituted this
sacrament in fermented bread, because, as we have read in Ex. 12, the
Jews, according to the Law, began to use unleavened bread on the day of
the Passover which is celebrated on the fourteenth day of the moon; and
Christ instituted this sacrament at the supper which He celebrated
"before the festival day of the Pasch" (Jn. 13:1, 4). Therefore we
ought likewise to celebrate this sacrament with fermented bread.
Objection 2: Further, legal observances ought not to be continued in
the time of grace. But the use of unleavened bread was a ceremony of
the Law, as is clear from Ex. 12. Therefore we ought not to use
unfermented bread in this sacrament of grace.
Objection 3: Further, as stated above ([4521]Q[65], A[1];[4522] Q[73],
A[3]), the Eucharist is the sacrament of charity just as Baptism is the
sacrament of faith. But the fervor of charity is signified by fermented
bread, as is declared by the gloss on Mat. 13:33: "The kingdom of
heaven is like unto leaven," etc. Therefore this sacrament ought to be
made of leavened bread.
Objection 4: Further, leavened or unleavened are mere accidents of
bread, which do not vary the species. But in the matter for the
sacrament of Baptism no difference is observed regarding the variation
of the accidents, as to whether it be salt or fresh, warm or cold
water. Therefore neither ought any distinction to be observed, as to