# Terceira Parte (TP)
## Capítulo 104: Whether what belongs to the human nature can be predicated of God?

Objection 1: It would seem that what belongs to the human nature cannot
be said of God. For contrary things cannot be said of the same. Now,
what belongs to human nature is contrary to what is proper to God,
since God is uncreated, immutable, and eternal, and it belongs to the
human nature to be created temporal and mutable. Therefore what belongs
to the human nature cannot be said of God.
Objection 2: Further, to attribute to God what is defective seems to be
derogatory to the Divine honor, and to be a blasphemy. Now what
pertains to the human nature contains a kind of defect, as to suffer,
to die, and the like. Hence it seems that what pertains to the human
nature can nowise be said of God.
Objection 3: Further, to be assumed pertains to the human nature; yet
it does not pertain to God. Therefore what belongs to the human nature
cannot be said of God.
On the contrary, Damascene says (De Fide Orth. iii, 4) that "God
assumed the idioms," i.e. the properties, "of flesh, since God is said
to be passible, and the God of glory was crucified."
I answer that, On this question there was a difference of opinion
between Nestorians and Catholics. The Nestorians wished to divide words
predicated of Christ, in this way, viz. that such as pertained to human
nature should not be predicated of God, and that such as pertained to
the Divine Nature should not be predicated of the Man. Hence Nestorius
said: "If anyone attempt to attribute sufferings to the Word, let him
be anathema" [*Council of Ephesus, Part I, ch. 29]. But if there are
any words applicable to both natures, of them they predicated what
pertained to both natures, as "Christ" or "Lord." Hence they granted
that Christ was born of a Virgin, and that He was from eternity; but
they did not say that God was born of a virgin, or that the Man was
from eternity. Catholics on the other hand maintained that words which
are said of Christ either in His Divine or in His human nature may be
said either of God or of man. Hence Cyril says [*Council of Ephesus,
Part I, ch. 26]: "If anyone ascribes to two persons or substances,"
i.e. hypostases, "such words as are in the evangelical and apostolic
Scriptures, or have been said of Christ by the Saints, or by Himself of
Himself, and believes that some are to be applied to the Man, and
apportions some to the Word alone---let him be anathema." And the
reason of this is that, since there is one hypostasis of both natures,
the same hypostasis is signified by the name of either nature. Thus