# Terceira Parte (TP)
## Capítulo 265: whether He was the Christ, on account of the manifold signs and force

of His teaching, as is stated Jn. 7:31,41, nevertheless they were
deceived afterwards by their rulers, so that they did not believe Him
to be the Son of God or the Christ. Hence Peter said to them: "I know
that you did it through ignorance, as did also your rulers"---namely,
because they were seduced by the rulers.
Reply to Objection 1: Those words are spoken by the husbandmen of the
vineyard; and these signify the rulers of the people, who knew Him to
be the heir, inasmuch as they knew Him to be the Christ promised in the
Law, but the words of Ps. 2:8 seem to militate against this answer:
"Ask of Me, and I will give Thee the Gentiles for Thy inheritance";
which are addressed to Him of whom it is said: "Thou art My Son, this
day have I begotten Thee." If, then, they knew Him to be the one to
whom the words were addressed: "Ask of Me, and I will give Thee the
Gentiles for Thy inheritance," it follows that they knew Him to be the
Son of God. Chrysostom, too, says upon the same passage that "they knew
Him to be the Son of God." Bede likewise, commenting on the words, "For
they know not what they do" (Lk. 23:34), says: "It is to be observed
that He does not pray for them who, understanding Him to be the Son of
God, preferred to crucify Him rather than acknowledge Him." But to this
it may be replied that they knew Him to be the Son of God, not from His
Nature, but from the excellence of His singular grace.
Yet we may hold that they are said to have known also that He was
verily the Son of God, in that they had evident signs thereof: yet out
of hatred and envy, they refused credence to these signs, by which they
might have known that He was the Son of God.
Reply to Objection 2: The words quoted are preceded by the following:
"If I had not done among them the works that no other man hath done,
they would not have sin"; and then follow the words: "But now they have
both seen and hated both Me and My Father." Now all this shows that
while they beheld Christ's marvelous works, it was owing to their
hatred that they did not know Him to be the Son of God.
Reply to Objection 3: Affected ignorance does not excuse from guilt,
but seems, rather, to aggravate it: for it shows that a man is so
strongly attached to sin that he wishes to incur ignorance lest he
avoid sinning. The Jews therefore sinned, as crucifiers not only of the
Man-Christ, but also as of God.