# Terceira Parte (TP)
## Capítulo 390: Whether Baptism should be deferred?

Objection 1: It seems that Baptism should be deferred. For Pope Leo
says (Epist. xvi): "Two seasons," i.e. Easter and Whitsuntide, "are
fixed by the Roman Pontiff for the celebration of Baptism. Wherefore we
admonish your Beatitude not to add any other days to this custom."
Therefore it seems that Baptism should be conferred not at once, but
delayed until the aforesaid seasons.
Objection 2: Further, we read in the decrees of the Council of Agde
(Can. xxxiv): "If Jews whose bad faith often "returns to the vomit,"
wish to submit to the Law of the Catholic Church, let them for eight
months enter the porch of the church with the catechumens; and if they
are found to come in good faith then at last they may deserve the grace
of Baptism." Therefore men should not be baptized at once, and Baptism
should be deferred for a certain fixed time.
Objection 3: Further, as we read in Is. 27:9, "this is all the fruit,
that the sin . . . should be taken away." Now sin seems to be taken
away, or at any rate lessened, if Baptism be deferred. First, because
those who sin after Baptism, sin more grievously, according to Heb.
10:29: "How much more, do you think, he deserveth worse punishments,
who hath . . . esteemed the blood of the testament," i.e. Baptism,
"unclean, by which he was sanctified?" Secondly, because Baptism takes
away past, but not future, sins: wherefore the more it is deferred, the
more sins it takes away. Therefore it seems that Baptism should be
deferred for a long time.
On the contrary, It is written (Ecclus. 5:8): "Delay not to be
converted to the Lord, and defer it not from day to day." But the
perfect conversion to God is of those who are regenerated in Christ by
Baptism. Therefore Baptism should not be deferred from day to day.
I answer that, In this matter we must make a distinction and see