# Suplemento (XP)
## Capítulo 165: Whether lack of members should be an impediment?

Objection 1: It would seem that a man ought not to be debarred from
receiving Orders on account of a lack of members. For one who is
afflicted should not receive additional affliction. Therefore a man
ought not to be deprived of the degree of Orders on account of his
suffering a bodily defect.
Objection 2: Further, integrity of discretion is more necessary for the
act of orders than integrity of body. But some can be ordained before
the years of discretion. Therefore they can also be ordained though
deficient in body.
On the contrary, The like were debarred from the ministry of the Old
Law (Lev. 21:18, seqq.). Much more therefore should they be debarred in
the New Law.
We shall speak of bigamy in the treatise on Matrimony ([4914]Q[66]).
I answer that, As appears from what we have said above
([4915]AA[3],4,5), a man is disqualified from receiving Orders, either
on account of an impediment to the act, or on account of an impediment
affecting his personal comeliness. Hence he who suffers from a lack of
members is debarred from receiving Orders, if the defect be such as to
cause a notable blemish, whereby a man's comeliness is bedimmed (for
instance if his nose be cut off) or the exercise of his Order
imperilled; otherwise he is not debarred. This integrity, however, is
necessary for the lawfulness and not for the validity of the sacrament.
This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.
OF THE THINGS ANNEXED TO THE SACRAMENT OF ORDER (SEVEN ARTICLES)
We must now consider the things that are annexed to the sacrament of
Order. Under this head there are seven points of inquiry:
(1) Whether those who are ordained ought to be shaven and tonsured in
the form of a crown?
(2) Whether the tonsure is an Order?
(3) Whether by receiving the tonsure one renounces temporal goods?
(4) Whether above the priestly Order there should be an episcopal
power?
(5) Whether the episcopate is an Order?
(6) Whether in the Church there can be any power above the episcopate?
(7) Whether the vestments of the ministers are fittingly instituted by
the Church?