# Suplemento (XP)
## Capítulo 458: Whether those souls which depart with original sin alone, suffer from a

bodily fire, and are punished by fire?
Objection 1: It would seem that souls which depart with none but
original sin, suffer from a bodily fire and are punished by fire. For
Augustine [*Fulgentius, De Fide ad Petrum, xxvii] says: "Hold firmly
and doubt not that children who depart this life without the sacrament
of Baptism will be punished everlastingly." Now punishment denotes
sensible pain. Therefore souls which depart this life with original sin
alone, suffer from a bodily fire and are tormented with the pain of
fire.
Objection 2: Further, a greater fault deserves a greater punishment.
Now original sin is greater than venial, because it contains more
aversion, since it deprives its subject of grace, whereas venial sin is
compatible with grace; and again because original sin is punished
eternally, whereas venial sin is punished temporally. Seeing then that
venial sin is deserving of the punishment of fire, much more so is
original sin.
Objection 3: Further, sins are more severely punished after this life
than during lifetime, for in this life there is room for mercy. Now,
sensible punishment corresponds to original sin in this life, for
children who have only original sin are justly subject to many sensible
punishments. Therefore sensible punishment is due to it after this
life.
Objection 4: Further, even as in actual sin there is aversion and
conversion, so in original sin there is something corresponding to
aversion, namely the privation of original justice, and something
corresponding to conversion, namely concupiscence. Now the punishment
of fire is due to actual sin by reason of the conversion. Therefore it
is also due to original sin by reason of concupiscence.
Objection 5: Further, after the resurrection the bodies of children
will be either passible or impassible. If they be impassible---and no
human body can be impassible except either on account of the gift of
impassibility (as in the blessed) or by reason of original justice (as
in the state of innocence)---it follows that the bodies of children
will either have the gift of impassibility, and thus will be glorious,
so that there will be no difference between baptized and non-baptized
children, which is heretical, or else they will have original justice,
and thus will be without original sin, and will not be punished for
original sin, which is likewise heretical. If, on the other hand, they
be passible, since everything passible suffers of necessity in the
presence of the active, it follows that in the presence of active
sensible bodies they will suffer sensible punishment.
On the contrary, Augustine says (Enchiridion xxiii) that the mildest
punishment of all will be for those who are burdened with original sin
only. But this would not be so, if they were tormented with sensible
punishment, because the pain of hell fire is most grievous. Therefore
they will not suffer sensible punishment.
Further, the grief of sensible punishment corresponds to the pleasure
of sin (Apoc. 18:7): "As much as she hath glorified herself and lived
in delicacies, so much torment and sorrow give ye to her." But there is
no pleasure in original sin, as neither is there operation, for
pleasure follows operation, as stated in Ethic. x, 4. Therefore
punishment by fire is not due to original sin.
Further, Gregory Nazianzen in his fortieth sermon, which is entitled on
Holy Baptism, distinguishes three classes of unbaptized persons: those
namely who refuse to be baptized, those who through neglect have put
off being baptized until the end of life and have been surprised by
sudden death, and those who, like infants, have failed to receive it
through no fault of theirs. Of the first he says that they will be
punished not only for their other sins, but also for their contempt of
Baptism; of the second, that they will be punished, though less
severely than the first, for having neglected it; and of the last he
says that "a just and eternal Judge will consign them neither to
heavenly glory nor to the eternal pains of hell, for although they have
not been signed with Baptism, they are without wickedness and malice,
and have suffered rather than caused their loss of Baptism." He also
gives the reason why, although they do not reach the glory of heaven,
they do not therefore suffer the eternal punishment suffered by the
damned: "Because there is a mean between the two, since he who deserves
not honor and glory is not for that reason worthy of punishment, and on
the other hand he who is not deserving of punishment is not for that
reason worthy of glory and honor."
I answer that, Punishment should be proportionate to fault, according
to the saying of Isaias (27:8), "In measure against measure, when it
shall be cast off, thou shalt judge it." Now the defect transmitted to
us through our origin, and having the character of a sin does not
result from the withdrawal or corruption of a good consequent upon
human nature by virtue of its principles, but from the withdrawal or
corruption of something that had been superadded to nature. Nor does
this sin belong to this particular man, except in so far as he has such
a nature, that is deprived of this good, which in the ordinary course
of things he would have had and would have been able to keep. Wherefore
no further punishment is due to him, besides the privation of that end
to which the gift withdrawn destined him, which gift human nature is
unable of itself to obtain. Now this is the divine vision; and
consequently the loss of this vision is the proper and only punishment
of original sin after death: because, if any other sensible punishment
were inflicted after death for original sin, a man would be punished
out of proportion to his guilt, for sensible punishment is inflicted
for that which is proper to the person, since a man undergoes sensible
punishment in so far as he suffers in his person. Hence, as his guilt
did not result from an action of his own, even so neither should he be
punished by suffering himself, but only by losing that which his nature
was unable to obtain. On the other hand, those who are under sentence
for original sin will suffer no loss whatever in other kinds of
perfection and goodness which are consequent upon human nature by
virtue of its principles.
Reply to Objection 1: In the authority quoted punishment denotes, not
pain of sense, but only pain of loss, which is the privation of the
divine vision, even as in Scripture the word "fire" is often wont to
signify any kind of punishment.
Reply to Objection 2: Of all sins original sin is the least, because it
is the least voluntary; for it is voluntary not by the will of the
person, but only by the will of the origin of our nature. But actual
sin, even venial, is voluntary by the will of the person in which it
is; wherefore a lighter punishment is due to original than to venial
sin. Nor does it matter that original sin is incompatible with grace;
because privation of grace has the character, not of sin, but of
punishment, except in so far as it is voluntary: for which reason that
which is less voluntary is less sinful. Again it matters not that
actual venial sin is deserving of temporal punishment, since this is
accidental, for as much as he who falls venially has sufficient grace
to attenuate the punishment. For if venial sin were in a person without
grace, it would be punished eternally.
Reply to Objection 3: There is no parity between pain of sense before
and after death, since before death the pain of sense results from the
power of the natural agent, whether the pain of sense be interior as
fever or the like, or exterior as burning and so forth. Whereas after
death nothing will act by natural power, but only according to the
order of divine justice, whether the object of such action be the
separate soul, on which it is clear that fire cannot act naturally, or
the body after resurrection, since then all natural action will cease,
through the cessation of the first movable which is the cause of all
bodily movement and alteration.
Reply to Objection 4: Sensible pain corresponds to sensible pleasure,
which is in the conversion of actual sin: whereas habitual
concupiscence, which is in original sin, has no pleasure. Hence,
sensible pain does not correspond thereto as punishment.
Reply to Objection 5: The bodies of children will be impassible, not
through their being unable in themselves to suffer, but through the
lack of an external agent to act upon them: because, after the
resurrection, no body will act on another, least of all so as to induce
corruption by the action of nature, but there will only be action to
the effect of punishing them by order of the divine justice. Wherefore
those bodies to which pain of sense is not due by divine justice will
not suffer punishment. On the other hand, the bodies of the saints will
be impassible, because they will lack the capability of suffering;
hence impassibility in them will be a gift, but not in children.