# Suplemento (XP)
## Capítulo 386: whether it be good or evil." Therefore each one's conscience must needs

retain all the works he has done, whether good or evil.
I answer that, According to Rom. 2:15,16, "In the day when God shall
judge" each one's conscience will bear witness to him and his thoughts
will accuse and defend him. And since in every judicial hearing, the
witness, the accuser, and the defendant need to be acquainted with the
matter on which judgment has to be pronounced, and since at the general
judgment all the works of men will be submitted to judgment, it will
behoove every man to be cognizant then of all his works. Wherefore each
man's conscience will be as a book containing his deeds on which
judgment will be pronounced, even as in the human court of law we make
use of records. Of these books it is written in the Apocalypse (20:12):
"The books were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book
of life; and the dead were judged by those things which were written in
the books [Vulg.: 'book'], according to their works." According to
Augustine's exposition (De Civ. Dei xx) the books which are here said
to be opened "denote the saints of the New and Old Testaments in whom
God's commandments are exemplified." Hence Richard of St. Victor (De
judic. potest.) says: "Their hearts will be like the code of law." But
the book of life, of which the text goes on to speak, signifies each
one's conscience, which is said to be one single book, because the one
Divine power will cause all to recall their deeds, and this energy, in
so far as it reminds a man of his deeds, is called the "book of life"
[*Cf. [5106]FP, Q[24], A[1], ad 1]. Or else we may refer the first
books to the conscience, and by the second book we may understand the
Judge's sentence as expressed in His providence.
Reply to Objection 1: Although many merits and demerits will have
escaped our memory, yet there will be none of them but will remain
somewhat in its effect, because those merits which are not deadened
will remain in the reward accorded to them, while those that are
deadened remain in the guilt of ingratitude, which is increased through
the fact that a man sinned after receiving grace. In like manner those
demerits which are not blotted out by repentance remain in the debt of
punishment due to them, while those which have been blotted out by
repentance remain in the remembrance of repentance, which they will
recall together with their other merits. Hence in each man there will
be something whereby he will be able to recollect his deeds.
Nevertheless, as Augustine says (De Civ. Dei xx), the Divine energy
will especially conduce to this.
Reply to Objection 2: Each one's conscience will bear certain marks of
the deeds done by him; and it does not follow that these marks are the
guilt alone, as stated above.
Reply to Objection 3: Although charity is now the cause of sorrow for
sin, yet the saints in heaven will be so full of joy, that they will
have no room for sorrow; and so they will not grieve for their sins,
but rather will they rejoice in the Divine mercy, whereby their sins
are forgiven them. Even so do the angels rejoice now in the Divine
justice whereby those whom they guard fall headlong into sin through
being abandoned by grace. and whose salvation none the less they
eagerly watch over.
Reply to Objection 4: The wicked will know all the good they have done,
and this will not diminish their pain; indeed, it will increase it,
because the greatest sorrow is to have lost many goods: for which
reason Boethius says (De Consol. ii) that "the greatest misfortune is
to have been happy."