# Suplemento (XP)
## Capítulo 137: Whether this sacrament ought to be repeated during the same sickness?

Objection 1: It would seem that this sacrament ought not to be repeated
during the same sickness. For one disease demands one remedy. Now this
sacrament is a spiritual remedy. Therefore it ought not to be repeated
for one sickness.
Objection 2: Further, if a sick man could be anointed more than once
during one disease, this might be done for a whole day: which is
absurd.
On the contrary, Sometimes a disease lasts long after the sacrament has
been received, so that the remnants of sin, against which chiefly this
sacrament is given, would be contracted. Therefore it ought to be given
again.
I answer that, This sacrament regards not only the sickness, but also
the state of the sick man, because it ought not to be given except to
those sick people who seem, in man's estimation, to be nigh to death.
Now some diseases do not last long; so that if this sacrament is given
at the time that the sick man is in a state of danger of death, he does
not leave that state except the disease be cured, and thus he needs not
to be anointed again. But if he has a relapse, it will be a second
sickness, and he can be anointed again. on the other hand some diseases
are of long duration, as hectic fever, dropsy and the like, and those
who lie sick of them should not be anointed until they seem to be in
danger of death. And if the sick man escape that danger while the
disease continues, and be brought again thereby to the same state of
danger, he can be anointed again, because it is, as it were, another
state of sickness, although strictly speaking, it is not another
sickness. This suffices for the Replies to the Objections.
HOLY ORDERS (QQ[34]-40)
OF THE SACRAMENT OF ORDER AS TO ITS ESSENCE AND ITS PARTS (FIVE
ARTICLES)
In the next place we must consider the sacrament of Order: (1) Order in
general; (2) the difference of Orders; (3) those who confer Orders; (4)
the impediments to receiving Orders; (5) things connected with Orders.
Concerning Order in general three points have to be considered: (1) Its
essence, quiddity, and parts; (2) Its effect; (3) The recipients of
Orders.
Under the first head there are five points of inquiry:
(1) Whether there should be Order in the Church?
(2) Whether it is fittingly defined?
(3) Whether it is a sacrament?
(4) Whether its form is expressed properly?
(5) Whether this sacrament has any matter?